About the Book

A master class on making money in day trading by one of India’s most
famous traders

In his trademark blunt style, and laced with wry throwaway humour, Ashwani Gujral cuts through the
clutter and awe surrounding day trading, sharply zeroing in on the skills, methods and abilities which
spell success in this most challenging and rewarding of endeavours.
 Sufficient
Developing a “Gut Feel” for the Markets
Goals Must be Stepped
Hardware, Software, Costs, Commissions and Record Keeping
Don’t Try to Drink the Entire Ocean
Overcome the Need to be Always Right
Conquer Your Ignorance
Conclusion

Publisher’s Afterword

Biblits by the seniors, is a
milestone to be really very proud of. In my speech there I set out in some
detail what makes an entrepreneur. I highlighted that in states like Gujarat,
engineers earned  12,000 as starting salary. Can you imagine the return on
investment (ROI) on all the money that your parents spent over decades to
educate you from the best of the institutes, giving you quality tuitions and
coaching classes, spending on your curricular activities plus entertainment
and grooming? What is the rate of return on all of it? I added: “Getting a job
is not a dream. Giving a job to ten people is a dream. Visualise repeatedly,
with faith. Be in the zone.”*

Trading is a very unique business. You decide your own salary. You decide
your promotion and demotion. You don’t need to woo buyers. You don’t
need to go seeking sellers. You require no marketing gimmicks. You need
not worry about issues relating to supply chain or inventory. Nobody sits
over your head every April doing your appraisal. You can work from a
mountain top or from a beach-facing room, so long as you have power
supply and an Internet connection available. You never face labour related



issues. You need nobody’s permission to be by your family when they need
you more than D-Street does.

This dialogue from the Bollywood movie Dear Zindagi is extremely apt: If you don’t take the
steering wheel in your own hands . . . someone else will sit in your life’s driving seat.

Before you jump onto the wagon, however, you have to prepare yourself
mentally and financially for the challenges. Someone has rightly said,
“Entrepreneurship is about living a few years of your life like most people
won’t, so that you can spend the rest of your life, like most people can’t.”

So take charge, take the plunge.

New Delhi ASHWANI GUJRAL
April 2018

Throughout the book, we have addressed the trader as “he” instead of he / she. That’s only
for ease of reading. The fact is that irrespective of gender, anyone with the right knowledge,
method and mind-set can become a good trader.

OceanofPDF.com



List of Abbreviations
ADR American Depository Receipt.
AGM Annual General Meeting.
Big B Nickname of Indian film star, Amitabh Bachchan.
Bollywood Nickname for Hindi Film Industry.
Business TV Business Television.
CEO Chief Executive Officer.
CPL Central Pivot Line.
CPR Central Pivot Range.
DMA Daily Moving Average.
D-Street Dalal Street, name of the street in Mumbai which houses the Bombay Stock

Exchange. A metaphor for the Indian stock market.
EMA Exponential Moving Average.
EPS Earnings Per Share.
EQ Emotional Quotient.
F&O Futures and Options.
FMCGs Fast Moving Consumer Goods.
IQ Intelligence Quotient.
IT Information Technology.
LB Lower Boundary.
MA Moving Average.
MACD Moving Average Convergence Divergence.
MBA Master of Business Administration.
MIT Manipal Institute of Technology.
MTM Mark to Market.
NBFCs Non Banking Financial Companies.
NCR National Capital Region.
NPA Non-Performing Asset.
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation.
PSU Public Sector Undertaking.
RBI Reserve Bank of India.
RERA Real Estate Regulation Act.
ROI Return on Investment.
SL Stop Loss.
SMA Simple Moving Average.
SRK Shah Rukh Khan, a top Indian film star.
UB Upper Boundary.



USD US Dollar.

OceanofPDF.com



Introduction

Debut of a Novice Trader on D-Street

With a racing heart, perspiring palms and nervous nerves, he calls up his
broker to buy a few stocks. After all, he thinks he knows the potential scope
of price rise and the rocket power lying dormant in those stocks. He
believes that the rocket shall get launched when his order is triggered. And
there lies his opportunity to make a few quick bucks, read millions.

As dialogue from a Bollywood film goes: Dil mein umang hai, aankhon
mein sapney hain, aur account mein paise apne hain, phir der kis baat ki —
The heart has hopes, the eyes dreams, and there is money in the bank, so
what’s holding you back?

His trusted source gave him an “inside tip” the previous night. The loud,
often arrogant, all-knowing and near-worshipped “market insider” he
knows has been bombarding him with new trading ideas every few minutes.
His WhatsApp account is buzzing all the time. All his spare moments and
after dinner chats always revolve around expected market action in the next
few days. There is so much information floating around him all the time;
newer ideas, tips, the extremely popular “sure-shots,” and what not.

Facing Facts

So, then, these traders should all be minting millions, enough to sustain
their lives and fulfil their dreams and desires? Right? Hold on, it isn’t that
easy. The fact is it takes a lot more than tips and news to make your mark in
one of the world’s most difficult professions.

This book covers a very serious topic — serious because it involves your
hard earned money. Markets can snatch away within minutes your earnings
of many years.



The market is full of advisers, books, tools, plenty of software, and so
many trading systems. Yet the success ratio is pathetically low. What do you
think is lacking? Why is it so difficult to understand that profit is the
difference between the buying price and the selling price, and that your
selling price should be higher than your buying price in order to make
gains? Is it so difficult to grasp that you will win only if you make the right
moves, and also stay away from the market at times? Or, that you must
enter low and exit high? After all, markets move — that is when they do,
half the time they refuse to move much — in only two directions, either up
or down. You can either buy or sell. What then makes it all so difficult, and
why is it that very few traders achieve success?

These are the secrets that we are here to unravel.
This book is not intended to overwhelm you with fancy technical tools,

difficult to pronounce techniques, or seemingly complicated screen shots in
order to awe you. In fact, the endeavour throughout the book is to talk about
extremely practical solutions and ideas about earning money from intraday
trading in the stock markets, not only bread and butter money, but also wine
and cheese money. It is about how to approach the market, every single
morning. And, that, is the crux of the matter.

Our Trading Arsenal

We will reveal our time-tested day trading systems which are easy to
understand and simple to implement. We will also deal with the kind of
expectations, experiences and evolution that a D-Street newbie goes
through in his or her journey, day after day and year after year.

As to technicals, we will talk about floor pivots and candlestick study,
and we will combine these with simple yet meaningful moving averages.
Importantly, we will learn how to add the catalyst of daily events and
breaking news in our trading. We will learn how day traders can understand,
interpret and gain from such events.

Stock market success is all about the 3Ms, method, money management
and mind-set. In addition to the method, we will also devote significant



space to the oft-neglected second and third Ms, namely money management
and mind-set.

Every single day in the markets is different. Every new trade requires you
to approach it in a specific way. We will cover the kinds of markets, the
kinds of days, the kinds of approaches to be adopted, and the kinds of
opportunities and traps that traders are typically presented with. The ways
of trading indices and individual stocks are very different. We will study the
differences in approach, with plenty of examples to highlight our methods.

Money is made through proper stock selection, timely entry and robust
trade management, right from the entry and till you exit a trade. That
includes managing the trade, your overall account size and, most
importantly, managing your mind during the entire journey. It is not just
techniques that we will study in this book; we will combine them with the
art of reading minds through markets.

For market traders there are times to show raw guts, and there are times
to be wise and lie low. We will discuss each of these aspects and as we
proceed we will weave the warps and the wefts of intraday trading tactics
into a robust money making mechanism.

The first five chapters of the book cover the three technical pillars of our
strategy, namely moving averages, candles, and floor pivots. These are the
building blocks of trading. Any trader serious about making trading his
business must clearly grasp these topics and master the related tools. You
will also discover that we have a unique way of looking at traditional tools
such as candles.

In Chapters 6 and 7 we will consider various entry and exit tactics, plus
several strategies of active trade management. Chapter 8 is all about
swinging sideways, namely about trading sideways markets. Chapter 9
shows how you can add spice and flavour to your trading with the help of
catalysts.

Chapter 10 covers the critical element of market traps, which is
especially important for futures and options (F&O) traders.



Chapter 11 uncovers the charisma of confluence, the synergistic power of
all the tools and techniques working together.

In Chapter 12 we address the very important topic of money
management. Successful money management is the one aspect that
separates the winning traders from losers.

Chapter 13 is about an aspect that singularly makes a trader successful. It
has nothing to do with technical know-how. It’s about victory over your
mind before victory over markets.

Finally, Chapter 14 offers you a complete run-down on a trader’s daily
preparation and trading plan.

Trading is like dancing on a revolving floor. The centre of gravity is
constantly shifting and you need to maintain your equilibrium in the
middle of it all. You have to be ever nimble, ever agile, ever alert.

Expectations and Evolution of an Intraday Trader

Success in intraday trading and short term trading requires a very dynamic,
alert, disciplined and cool headed strategist who can digest victories,
survive defeats — and bounce back quickly from both. There are many
people in the world who have made their mark, as well as made millions, in
this field. So there is no reason to believe that it’s an unconquerable
territory.

Yes, the territory is hostile and the punishments can be harsh because
markets don’t forgive mistakes. The rewards, however, are equally enticing,
and these rewards go well beyond monetary benefits. This field is only for
those who are highly disciplined and willing to go the extra mile.

Using a Bollywood metaphor, and recalling a dialogue from the Hindi
film Raees — siney mein aag aur dimaag mein thandak — fire in the belly
combined with a cool head is the right combination of qualities that makes
for a successful day trader.

A novice on D-Street often assumes that there are endless opportunities
waiting for him to make money, and that he simply needs to go forth and
get his share. He assumes that once he knows the right stock to get into, he



can just ride his way to super normal profits every morning. Well, he who
knows not, and knows not that he knows not — no one can save him.

Novice traders typically ignore both the methodology that they should
adopt and the discipline that they must adhere to as traders. They will also
likely be surrounded by people who will make it seem all so easy. The
resultant expectations that a novice therefore comes to the market with are
usually illogical. He often struggles to put the pieces of the puzzle together.
He will make money one day, only to lose it the very next, thus bringing
himself back to where he started. He may add to his funds, and he will
likely seek advice from various sources. He may then start trading more
frequently, but even when he makes some profits, chances are that he may
refuse to book his gains in expectations of even bigger gains. He will often
find himself in deep shades of red and that’s when he will finally exit. Once
he is out of it, he may then find the same stock moving in his expected
direction! He now has a reason to believe that if only he had shown some
courage to hold on for longer, he would have made a killing. Next time he
does exactly that, only to kill himself. Whoa!

Only then does he realise that there are miles to go before he can
peacefully sleep. Thus begins a journey of self-discovery. If he finishes it
successfully, he will have grown not just financially but in many other ways
as well. This book will show you what goes into making your way through
this jungle into a rewarding journey.

The Three Stages of a Trader’s Journey

The journey of a trader has three stages:

It starts with a “wow” stage where he is simply awestruck — and
greedstruck — seeing the screen and the millions floating everywhere.
He assumes it all to be a piece of cake.
Then comes the “how” stage where reality sinks in. He now realises it’s
not as simple as he thought, and that a great deal of effort is required to
succeed. If he survives it all, then he emerges as a winner.
Then comes the third stage, again a “wow” stage when he can reap the
fruit of his labour.



The path may appear long at times; at times, the journey may even look
scary as well. But, then, we triumph without glory if we conquer without
danger. So let the game begin. Don’t just sit and stare. Do and dare.

So let’s learn how to control the chaos, cut through the clutter and find
our way through the seeming madness called the market. It is very easy to
make things complicated. But it takes true expertise to make things simple.
That is the purpose of this book. It teaches you how to keep your eyes and
ears open, use your common sense, maintain a daily trading ritual that
works. It will show you how to read the rhythm of the market, how to
analyse the bigger picture, and then it will pin-point how and when to pull
the trigger. That gives you simple to follow, all-encompassing and workable
ways to making money in intraday trading.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 1

OceanofPDF.com



Mastering Market Basics and Moving
Averages

Introduction

I had my money, I had my friends,
I asked for advice from those friends,
I traded in stocks as advised by friends,
I first lost money,
and later my friends!

There are no free lunches in life. Equally, there are no easy gains in stock
markets either. So while we all take help and advice from others, and there
is nothing wrong with that, it is important to understand and master for
yourself the game that you are playing. Markets are like car racing. Can you
imagine yourself behind the steering in a fast racing car and WhatsApping
your friends and asking them what to do next? You will be gone if you do
so, sooner rather than later. It’s the same in the markets. You need to help
yourself, and equip yourself. As the popular adage goes, heaven too helps
those who help themselves. Wisdom says, learn before you earn. So help
yourself by making yourself market ready. You must understand the game
and its rules before playing it.

In this chapter we will learn about the different types of market movements
and their broad phases. We will also consider the various types of market
participants whose market behaviour results in those phases and moves. We
will also get an insight into the modus operandi of economic and business



cycles. Once through with these basics, we will introduce you to the first
tool in our arsenal, moving averages.

OceanofPDF.com



Market Basics

The Two Kinds of Markets

Stock markets don’t always move in expected or desired lines but, then,
neither does your better-half! Well, let’s be thankful to them all for giving
us enough training in dealing with life’s unexpected highs and lows. This
experience equips us to handle both surprises and shocks. In short, living
with volatility is a fact of everyday life. So, too, is the daily story of stock
market traders. While it remains true that each market day is different from
any other, but we can still broadly classify market movements into the
following two commonly observed categories:

1. Trending markets, and
2. Ranging — or range bound — markets.

It’s important to understand this broad classification. It will help you
immensely in making your way through the thickets of the market jungle.
Markets are not random, and there is a pattern to their moves. Let’s see
how.

Trending Markets

Trending markets are characterised by prices that keep moving in one
direction for a significant length of time. When the price keeps moving
higher, we call it an uptrend, while if the price keeps moving lower, it is
called a downtrend.

In an uptrend, prices move in such a way that every price high is higher
than the previous price high, and each price low is also higher than the
previous low.

The reverse happens in a downtrend. The prices form both lower highs
and lower lows in a downtrend.



Yes, there will be halts in between the successively higher or
successively lower levels. Also, there are periods of retracements, namely
temporary periods of price moving in the direction opposite to the trend.
Retracements can be minor dips or deeper corrections, but the trend sustains
so long as the retracements stay limited, and the price resumes its move
further in the original direction as soon as the pullback finds support in the
case of an uptrend — or resistance in the case of a downtrend. The self-
explanatory diagrams in Figure 1.1, and the real market charts in Figure 1.2
and Figure 1.3 will help make this clear.

Figure 1.1: Uptrend on the left characterised by the price making successively higher tops
and higher bottoms, with retracements indicated. Downtrend shown on the right with prices

making successively lower tops and lower bottoms, again with intervening pullbacks.



Figure 1.2: Clear case of an uptrend in the chart of Ultra Cement, each high is higher than
the previous high; and each low is also higher than the previous low.

Figure 1.3: Mindtree in a clear downtrend; the price goes on forming lower highs and lower
lows.

All market participants love trending markets. Trending phases provide
traders excellent money making opportunities. It is up to the trader to make



the best use of a trend by staying with it so long as the trend stays with him.
For day traders, staying with the trend may mean holding onto the

position for the better part of a day. This should be done only when the
charts are showing the strongest signs of a trend day, and not otherwise. Of
course, it goes without saying that if the situation starts going against him,
the trader should not overstay his welcome. Always remember, adaptation is
the key to survival.

On the other hand, if everything seems to be working in your favour then
you should not be in any hurry to exit. Most traders underestimate how the
really strong moves can overshoot all your targets and can surprise you with
more gains than you can imagine. You do not want to later repent about
premature exits, so take all precautions and have clear strategies for all
situations formulated in your mind in advance. Stay logical, stay on edge,
and stay sharp to all changes.

This reminds us of a story. Some of you might know about Victoria’s
Secret, the company that is into high-end lingerie wear for women.

A Stanford MBA named Roy Raymond wanted to buy his wife some
lingerie but was embarrassed to shop for it at a departmental store. That’s
how he saw a gap in the market and came up with the idea of a high-end
store that didn’t make one feel awkward about shopping for innerwear. He
borrowed funds from his in-laws and from a bank and opened a classy
store, calling it Victoria’s Secret, with funds of about USD 80,000. The
store made sales of half-a-million USD in its first year. Raymond then
started a catalogue, opened five more stores and began growing fast. Yes,
there were business challenges but generally everything was falling in place
and he was growing in a big way. But he didn’t stay with it despite
everything in his favour. He soon sold the business to Leslie Wexner for one
million dollars. He lived happily ever after, right?

Wrong. Two years later, the worth of the company was USD 500 million.
Oops! Roy Raymond must have felt likes jumping off the Golden Gate
Bridge.

Ranging — or Range Bound — Markets



Ranging markets are those where stock prices, or indices, move in such a
way that they form successive highs and lows at nearly the same level,
unlike trending markets where successive highs and lows are either higher
or lower, as described earlier. The price movement in a ranging market
typically forms two horizontal boundaries some distance apart, and the
price may rise and fall within the two boundaries and thus stay rangebound
instead of making any directional moves. You will be able to see this with
greater clarity after the formation of at least two equal highs, or two equal
lows. There could be failed attempts to break out from the boundaries.
When such breakouts fail to see a follow through move in the same
direction, prices again fall back inside the range formed by the boundaries
and move towards the other end. Such failed breakout attempts give trading
opportunities for a trade towards the other end of the range.

This is a sort of consolidation of the market movement. It is the phase
when the market is taking rest and building strength before taking another
leap. Sometimes when the range is wide enough it is possible to take trades
within the range. We know that once the price finds support at the lower
end, it will make a move towards the upper end, and vice versa. So traders
often like to enter long at the bottom of the range with a target near the top.
Or, they go short at the top of the range with a target near its bottom. So we
are essentially trading against the boundaries and this is commonly known
as fade trade.

A ranging market requires very specific tactics and is not easy to trade,
unless you are very good at accurately timing your moves. Also, there are
times when the range is too narrow to be tradeable. It’s best to wait on the
side-lines at such times.

Let us have a look at Figure 1.4 and then a real market example in Figure
1.5.



Figure 1.4: This is how range bound markets look. Note that the successive price tops and
bottoms are at about the same levels.

Figure 1.5: Asian Paints moving sideways, bounded in a range of nearly equal highs and lows.



Market Participants and Their Behaviour

Markets are driven by the behaviour of their participants. It is the activity of
buyers and sellers, or the lack of it, that decides the kind of charts that you
see on your screen. The participants, whether buyers or sellers, can be
broadly classified into two kinds. It is important to know them well because
it is their behavioural pattern, their actions and their reactions that will tell
you what you can expect from the market. Only if you can identify the kind
of players who are participating in the market at the time can you hope to
anticipate the outcome and trade accordingly.

Let’s call the first type as reactive players, and the second type as active
players.

The Reactive Players

Reactive market players are those participants who buy or sell a particular
stock when they believe that the stock’s prevailing market price is far
above, or far below, its fair value. In other words, they will buy a stock if
they believe that its current market price is lower than what the fair value
should be. Correspondingly, they will be willing to sell if they see and
believe that the current market price is way too stretched above the fair
value. Thus, their efforts and actions will always drive the price towards its
perceived fair value level. If the price of a given stock, as perceived by
them, is too high, they will wait on the sidelines and buy if and only when it
comes down lower. Similarly, sellers will sell a stock only when the price
rises to their perceived selling level. They will thus react to what they see
happening around.

Now if you look at this behaviour closely you will realise that investors
have a pre-conceived valuation about a given stock in their mind. By their
actions, they are trying to keep the stock around those pre-conceived
valuation levels. This behaviour keeps the stock prices and, in turn, the
overall market within a typical range. This range thus becomes a sort of
equilibrium for the stock and the market. These are what we term as trading
or ranged markets. The range is the area between the high and the low of



the price, namely the boundaries within which the price is moving. So the
previous day’s range means the high and the low of the previous day.

Further, since reactive players usually have a shorter term horizon and
target, they are unwilling to attribute any higher or lower valuation to the
stock under study. Thus, they won’t initiate any strong buying or selling
activity that can lift the prices above this range or drag it below the range.
This leads to range bound markets. Any price move that takes the stock to
the lower end of the range will entice buyers to enter long and take the
prices higher. Any move that takes prices higher and up to the upper end of
the range, will entice sellers who will enter short and take the prices lower
to the other end of the range. The moves are thus limited in size and will not
break the boundaries of the range. The market or the stock will keep
moving in between these boundary levels.

The Active Players

It takes a very strong and knowledgeable set of players to move the
markets. These active players who believe that the price of a given stock
can be, and should be, higher or lower than the equilibrium range created by
the reactive players. When such buyers or sellers enter the market with a
strong conviction about prices, they will be willing to buy above the upper
boundary of the range, or sell below the lower boundary of the range. Only
when this happens with considerable strength, conviction and volumes does
the price break out or break down from the equilibrium zone, namely the
range.

Active players are willing to buy at higher levels and sell at lower prices
in the belief that prices will see further higher or lower levels in times
ahead. By their actions, aggression and conviction about the future such
market players are responsible for the price either breaking down or
breaking out from a range. We shall call them active players. They don’t
react to the current price values; they are all out to form another value,
higher or lower from the current one. They actively initiate actions that
break the current normal. This, in turn, entices more players to enter the
market, investors and traders who now realise that it is futile to wait any
further for a correction back into the range, and that if they don’t pull the



trigger now then they may simply miss the bus. Such follow up
participation prods the price, taking it further out of the equilibrium zone.
That’s when trends are formed. Thus the market moves from being a trading
one, to being a trending one.

So, you see, it’s necessary for the markets to lose equilibrium at times.
After all, that’s when trends are formed.

Right, so now we have two kinds of market participants, active and
reactive (see Figure 1.6). And we also have two kinds of markets, trading or
range bound, and trending. They form the two phases of the markets,
expansion and contraction. Let’s see how.

Figure 1.6: Reactive players lack the conviction to pull prices out of a band. Active players do
just that. And how!

The Two Market Phases

Expansion Phase



The market or a stock is said to be in an expansion phase when its price
is trending in one direction and the daily range is comparatively wide.
Such moves are dictated by active participants who come in with strong
conviction and are willing to take the price either to new higher levels or
new lower levels. In other words, they are willing to buy at higher prices
when they are expecting the price to go even higher. They are also willing
to dump the stocks at lower prices since they anticipate even lower levels in
the coming days. If the price highs and price lows are confined within a
clear band, or between two parallel lines, then the price-band would be
sloping either upwards or downwards depending on the direction of the
trend. In such situations, there is a clear sense of direction and the moves
are backed by strong momentum. It is the active participants who should be
credited for these kinds of moves. Their aggressive buying or selling action
takes the price far away from the mean value. It takes very specific
techniques to trade these markets and you will have to get a grip over these
techniques before you can trade profitably. You can get good moves in such
markets by staying with the trend till it ends. You can take trades in the
direction of the trend, either on price corrections or on time corrections.
Trending moves and expansion phases go hand in hand.

Contraction Phase

The market is said to be in a contraction phase when prices move in a tight
range. This phase is driven by reactive participants who lack the conviction
to take prices beyond a certain level, whether up or down. The price keeps
moving around the mean value as perceived by these participants. There is a
clear lack of conviction and market players are unwilling to pay higher than
their perceived price for buying. Equally, they are also not ready to dump
the stock at lower levels. The moves are thus limited in size until the range
gets taken out or taken down. There will be supply pressure at the upper end
and demand pressure at the lower end, but not enough to take the prices
outside the band.

The markets keep alternating between the two phases of contraction and
expansion. A contraction phase or a ranging market go hand in hand. A
contraction is followed by an expansion, and then again by another



contraction. This is very normal. It is the market’s way of taking a breather
post a trending move, and before making another trending move whether in
the same or in the reverse direction.

Economy, Business Cycle and Sector Rotation

Stock markets move in anticipation of changes in economic activity and the
likely impact of those changes on stock prices. The psychological attitude
of investors to the expected economic and business developments is what
drives the markets. That’s why it is said that markets discount the future.
Expectations of an expanding economy will lift the markets higher, while
the fear of contraction in business activity and economy as a whole leads to
a fall in stock prices. Markets and the economy are both always in a state of
constant flux, rarely in equilibrium. An economy is made up of many
sectors or businesses. As the economy moves from contraction to
expansion, and back to contraction, so does the business cycle of various
sectors that are parts of the broader economy. Thus, the business cycle
comprises a series of events that constantly repeat themselves, forming
alternate peaks and troughs as the economy contracts and expands.

This contraction and expansion in the economy is largely driven by
interest rate cycles. As interest rates in the economy rise and fall, they have
different impact on various businesses and sectors at each stage. The central
bank, RBI in India, changes interest rates in order to control inflation. Thus,
based on inflation levels the interest rates keep going up or down.
Depending on the rates, the economic activity in the various sectors also
keeps rising or falling. When interest rates are increased in order to control
inflation, it leads to a lowering of economic activity along with lower
inflation. On the other hand, a reduction in interest rates leads to a growth
in business activities. During economic expansion, businesses often create
too much production capacity in expectation of higher future sales. The
excess capacity later remains unused, or idle, when sales become stagnant
or start falling. There is then no question of business capacity expansion



until the excess inventory is depleted. So, once such a situation occurs you
will see long periods of low capital expenditure.

The ever changing levels of economic activity create ever changing
cycles across various industry sectors. These various industry sectors
operate in different cycles at the same time.

At the start of an economic cycle, interest rates in the economy are
lowered in order to boost business activity and perk up rate sensitive
sectors. Thus, you see an upturn first in sectors like housing, auto, etc.
which are largely driven by interest rates. All consumer centric sectors also
perform well at such times. The idle capacity of these plants and companies
will start getting utilised as their sales improve.

Typically, businesses do not require any capacity expansion at this time
and so there is no rise in capital expenditure. Initially, then, sectors such as
capital goods, commodities, metals may not do too well. As the business
cycle picks up further, these sectors will slowly expand and this will lead to
a pick-up in capital goods and later also the commodity sectors. By that
time the sectors which were earlier moving handsomely might be done and
over with the best part of their move, and may well actually have peaked
out. So, the responsibility to sustain the markets would now be shouldered
by fresh sectors. Capacity expansion will lead to an increase in prices of
commodities and thus a rise in inflation. To control inflation, the interest
rates will be raised and that will lead to a fall in interest rate sensitive
sectors. Thus, financial sectors and the consumer facing businesses and
retail consumption sectors lead the upturn in the economic cycle, and
capital goods and commodities, mines, metals, etc. are the laggards.

Also, higher the dislocation of the overall economy from the equilibrium
levels to the lowest point, the stronger will be the swing back towards the
equilibrium and to the positive side as well. The commodities that we are
referring to here are industrial commodities, and not weather-driven
agricultural commodities, such as food grain, etc. The typical business cycle
thus keeps moving between peaks and troughs and usually the entire cycle
lasts anywhere from 3 to 5 years between troughs. The central line shown in
Figure 1.7 indicates the equilibrium. The phase above the equilibrium is the
period of expansion and below it is the period of contraction. Periods of
expansion usually last longer than do periods of contraction. That’s because



it takes a longer time to build something than to tear it down. Technical
analysis helps you determine which sector is turning, and when.

Figure 1.7: The economic cycle with the expansion and contraction phases highlighted.

It’s also important to understand that when the economy initially turns
upward, there is a lot of prudent focus on quality businesses because the
wounds and bruises of the previous fall are still fresh in the memories of
investors. As time passes, fresh gains and confidence overcome this caution.
That’s when you see even cats and dogs starting to fly.

This is the basic summary of how the economy moves, and how different
sectors within the economy keep rotating. We have also seen the kinds of
market movements that accompany each turn of the economy. It is crucial
that short term traders, including day traders, to focus on these sectoral
rotations and trade generally in the hot and happening sectors. If the
strongest of sectors, like banks or technology, are falling fast, then traders
must realise that it can get difficult for the overall markets to sustain higher



levels in the absence of support from sectors that matter and carry high
index weightage. Holding on to your stocks even when the situations
change is not at all a great idea.

OceanofPDF.com



Moving Averages (MAs)
Now we know that markets do not move in straight lines, and that they are
volatile. If you are expecting clear skies, then you are expecting too much.
There’s always going to be a lot of noise around in the markets. Thus, for
example, it is important to beware that an uptrend will also have many
down days, and a downtrend will have many up days. This is not just
normal, it’s healthy. Those who see and follow charts on a regular basis
know this very well.

Money can be made when you learn to make sense of this chaos. That’s
exactly what a moving average line does. Once you understand how to read,
interpret and use a moving average, it is a very simple tool. Most trading
software have this tool in-built. Once you understand when and how to use
it, there is no reason why you should get confused about the market’s next
move, or your own.

A moving average cuts out the noise, i.e. the market’s random
fluctuations, by giving you the average value of the price over a given
duration. A moving average of 10 days will be calculated by determining
the average value of closing prices of the stock or the index concerned for
the previous 10 days. A 10-day moving average, or 10DMA, will be the
average value of the closing prices from Day 1 to Day 10. On the following
day, it will be calculated using closing price values from Day 2 to Day 11,
and so on. That’s the reason we call it a moving average. Since we are
basically taking the successive previous ten days closing prices, we go on
removing the first day of the series, and add the latest closing value as each
day passes by. Similarly, for a 20-day moving average we take the average
of the closing price values of the previous 20 days. There isn’t any need to
get into further details of calculations; you will be able to plot moving
averages using your charting software. Once plotted, your aim should be to
use and interpret them correctly — and make money.



Types of Moving Averages
There are various types of moving averages, such as a simple moving
average (SMA), an exponential moving average (EMA), and a few more. It
is useful to have a fair idea about those variations, and how they differ in
their application.

Exponential moving averages are calculated by giving higher weightage
to the more recent prices and thus the EMA line will hug the price line more
tightly, unlike simple averages which give equal weightage to all data
points.

We now know that moving average for “X” days is calculated by taking
the closing prices of “X” number of days. This “X” is the time duration of
the moving average, or MA, line. The moving average length (duration)
being used by investors and traders varies from 3 periods to 200 periods.
We will find out which particular moving averages ought to be used when
we come to defining our day trading methods. But, first, we look at some
more MA fundamentals.

Characteristics of Moving Averages
1. The simple moving average, or SMA, is less sensitive than the

exponential moving average, or EMA. As a result, SMAs react a bit slower
to changes in prices than do EMAs. Consequently, the EMA is often
preferred by short term traders looking for quick moves. Simple moving
averages react a little slower, but can still be used profitably for trading. The
important thing is to be consistent with any one style that suits you, and you
will succeed. Every moving average will work if you know how to use it.

2. Moving averages will stay closer, or farther, from the price depending
also on their time period. A 10-period moving average stays closer to the
price line as compared to a 20- or 50-period MA. This happens because the
shorter period MA is based on fewer data points. A longer period moving
average has more data points which may be placed farther from one



another, and thus give you an MA line that strays farther from price points.
Have a look at the chart in Figure 1.8.

Figure 1.8: See how the shorter time period MA — the 10MA line — stays closer to the price
as compared to the higher period moving averages, 20MA and 50MA.

3. It is important to note that in the case of a sudden rise or fall in price,
the price line immediately moves farther away from the MA lines, no matter
which time frame MA is being used (see Figure 1.9). This is very common.
Often at such times, the stock or the index under study may try to strongly
snap back towards the MA line. This behaviour offers opportunities to alert
traders.

4. When the price of a given stock is rising continuously, the moving
average line, will start sloping upward. The upward slope of the moving
average line shows that there is buying pressure and that the prices are
expected to stay high and rise further (see Figure 1.10). The positive slope
of the MA line is thus an indication of an uptrend. A trader should maintain
a bullish bias for such stocks and try to enter them long at appropriate
times. The price will stay above the MA line during the uptrend. We will
explain this further as we define our entry tactics. Conversely, in a stock
which is falling, the MA line will slope down and this confirms that the



trend is down and prices may fall further. A trader should maintain a
negative bias in such stocks and enter short at appropriate times. Prices will
usually stay below the MA line during a downtrend.

Figure 1.9: Drastic rise or fall will always take price action away from the MA lines. Sooner
or later prices snap back towards the MA lines, offering trading opportunities to alert traders.

5. When markets are trendless, the moving average lines may either stay
flat, or move up and down rapidly as prices keep criss-crossing the MA line
(see Figure 1.10). At these times, none of the directional biases or moves
will sustain long enough for a successful trade. Since it is difficult to
maintain a position in one direction for any reasonable time period, it is
difficult to maintain a directional bias. Every now and then the direction of
the price move may change and the price may keep crossing above and
below the MA line and thus keep whipsawing you on both sides, up and
down. As we proceed, we will learn how to handle such periods. This is a
common phenomenon during range bound markets and, as mentioned
earlier, you can either fade the boundaries, or stay away till a trend emerges.



Figure 1.10: See the relationship between trends, price action and the MA line. Price stays
below the MA line in a downtrend and above it during an uptrend. The MA line slopes up in an

uptrend, and down during a downtrend.

6 When the trend is up, any kind of a retracement in price will likely find
buyers coming in around the MA line. Correspondingly, in a down trending
stock, any efforts to pull the price back higher may meet with selling
pressure, i.e. supply pressure, at the MA line. Thus an MA line will act as a
support during an uptrend, arresting or halting the falls; and the same MA
works as a resistance during a downtrend, capping the corrective moves or
rises. All these points are illustrated in the chart in Figure 1.11.



Figure 1.11: Here we see all the characteristics together on one chart: 1. Prices stay above the
MA line in uptrend and below the MA in downtrend. 2. The MA line slopes up in an uptrend

and slopes down in a downtrend. 3. A smaller time frame MA line stays closer to prices. 4. The
MA line acts as a support in an uptrend and as a resistance in a downtrend.

7. Moving averages also reveal a change in trend. When price moves
above the MA line from below, you can safely assume that there is a shift in
the momentum, and in the bias of the participants from bearish to bullish.
This gets confirmed if the price continues to journey up and as the MA line
also then starts sloping upwards.

Conversely, when price falls below the MA line from above, it shows a
shift in momentum and the participants’ bias from bullish to bearish. This
gets confirmed if the price journey continues downward, and if the MA line
starts sloping down as well. The slope of the MA line is as important as the
current trend.

8. Moving averages are considered trend following indicators as they are
derived from past prices. They do not predict future direction; they react to
past data. Which is why they are also said to be lagging indicators. Despite
the lag factor, however, they do their main job well, which is to tamp down



the market noise caused by volatile price fluctuations. MA lines are very
powerful tools and can constitute a trading system on their own.

9. As we’ve learnt, different MA lines use different data points in their
calculations. Accordingly, they will also show trends of different time
periods. A 10MA will show the general price direction for ten time periods,
while a 200MA will show the prevailing trend over 200 time periods.
Longer moving averages take a longer time to change both their direction
and slope and thus are less reactive to short term changes in prices (see
Figure 1.12 and Figure 1.13). A 10MA line will turn quicker and behave
more nimbly than would a 50MA line which will take longer to confirm a
change in trend. This happens because the 50MA needs more data points for
its calculations.

Figure 1.12: This Nifty chart shows how the 200DMA line turns up from down after an
almost 1,000 point rally in Nifty. The 20DMA responds immediately when Nifty turns. Nifty

stays below the MA lines in a downtrend, and crosses above it when the trend reverses. These
rules work on all time frames.



Figure 1.13: The longer time frame MA line doesn’t turn in smaller moves but stays steady.
Smaller time frame MA line is quick to react, even to smaller moves.

10. Some of the moving averages that work well for intraday trading
include 20MA, 50MA, 200MA. The 20MA line will stay closest to the price
action, 50MA line a bit farther, while the farthest from the price will be the
200MA line. The best of upside trades occur when all the three moving
averages are sloping up, are almost parallel to one another, and the price is
above all of them. There will be corrections midway which can take the
price down to the 20MA line, the 50MA line, and even the 200MA line
depending on the extent of the correction. The reverse can happen in a
down move, where prices are pulled upwards towards these MA lines
during corrections. The best downside moves happen when all the moving
average lines are sloping down, are almost parallel to one another, and
prices are below the MA lines.

11. During periods of long consolidations, or in range bound markets, all
the three moving average lines may start bunching together very close to
one another and become almost flat. This is the contraction phase of the
market we studied earlier, when the market is said to be ranging. If the
market participants decide to let the trend resume, then the price will start



moving higher, or lower, at some point depending on the direction of the
new move. You can see in Figure 1.14 how the 20MA and 50MA lines
begin to slope up, and down, accordingly. Once all MA lines start lining up
parallel again, the trend is said to be well in place. The 200MA line will
take a longer time before it starts turning, and thus stays relatively flat but
the trending move can still be decently large and tradeable. And, yes, if the
chart is a daily chart, the 20MA line would be coming from 20 days’
candles. If it is an hourly chart, the MA line would be created by the last 20
hourly candles. You will see each of these combinations as we present the
numerous examples and charts in the book, including the one Figure 1.14.

Figure 1.14: During trends, all MA lines will slope in the direction of the trend. During flat
markets, these lines may bunch up close to one another and stay flat.

Milestones Covered

Right, so now we know about the two main market phases — the trading
phase and the trending phase.

We have also seen the various trends — up, down, and sideways, i.e. the
ranging trend.

We have identified the two kinds of players in the markets who cause
these moves by their behavioural patterns and participation.



We reviewed what the economic cycle is and the resultant sectoral
rotations it causes.

And, we have learnt the basics about the moving average tool.
Coming up next is our own unique and distinctive study of candlesticks.

We’ll stick to our promise of keeping things simple. So, it’s going to be
different from the typical candle analysis that you might have read at
various places — and that’s a promise.

During a Mirchi Music Awards telecast on Zee TV, we came across some beautiful lines
recited and written by the poet Nusrat Badr which won him an award for the best non-film
song. He had been writing for 14 to 15 years before being recognised for his work. We
quote him, with minor modifications:

Aansu ko patthar ki bhi aankho se nikalte I have seen tears flowing from stones.
dekha hai hum ne. . . .
Phoolon ko sukhi hui shakhon par bhi khilte I have seen flowers growing on dried
dekha hai hum ne. . . . branches.
Mere vishwas ka udao na mazaak Khwabon Don’t mock my faith, I’ve seen dreams turn
ko haqikat mein badalte dekha hai hum ne. into reality.

Moral: Success isn’t impossible, but it may not happen overnight.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 2

OceanofPDF.com



Understanding Candles

Introduction
In this chapter we will see the basic anatomy of candlesticks and consider
the important factors that one must heed while reading candles. We shall
first cover three main candle types, and then study their important
characteristics that one must pay close attention to for high accuracy candle
reading.

This chapter covers the topic in a very unique way, unlike the traditional
candle studies which often end up describing some fifty types of candle
patterns. Let’s, however, understand why we need to use this pictorial price
presentation. Actually, the reasons are simple. First, a picture is worth a
thousand words. Second, for making profits in the stock market one has to
correctly time the trade entry and exit. Any position which is taken without
correct timing will not give the desired results within the selected time
frame. Candlesticks help in timing your trade entries and exits. Your
success in markets depends on both, what trade you enter into, and when.
Candles answer the second part, namely when.

The Anatomy of Candles
Just as a picture is worth a thousand words, a candle is worth many words,
price quotes and interpretations.

A candle is a graphical representation of the prices traded during a certain
period of time. For example, a 5-minute candle will show the price range
that prevailed during that particular 5-minute period. The first traded price
during this period forms the opening level of the candle, and the last traded



price forms its closing level. Additionally, a candle will present the highest
high point and the lowest low point made by the price during that period.

If the closing price is higher than the opening level, the candle’s colour
will be green (or white), while if it’s lower the colour will be red (or black).
A green candle thus depicts the bullish mood of market participants in that
period. It shows that the bulls could successfully take the prices higher. A
red candle, on the other hand, shows that the overall market mood was
bearish and that the bears successfully forced the price lower. Thus, every
candle depicts the battle fought between the bulls and bears during the
period concerned.

A candle has two main parts:

The main body of the candle, namely its green or red area as the case
may be, is bound by the open and close price values.
The other important part of the candle are its shadows, which are both
above and below its body. These shadows, or tails as they are also
often called, do indeed have a tale to tell. These are the lowest and
highest price levels reached during the period concerned. It takes bull
power to take the price from its lowest value to a closing value above
this low. Higher the bull power, bigger is the pull-back from the low,
and thus longer the lower tail or shadow. Correspondingly, it takes bear
power to force down the price from the highs of the given period to a
closing value which is lower than that high. Thus, a longer upper
shadow means that the bears could force the prices that much lower
from the highs before the candle closed.

If you grasp this concept clearly, then you will understand that a small
red candle with a longer lower shadow is more bullish than a small
green candle with longer upper shadow — and vice versa.

Important Factors in Interpreting Candles
It is important that you thoroughly study Figure 2.1 and understand that it is
not just the colour of a candle’s body that decides the degree of bullishness



or bearishness in a given candle. The size of the body matters as well, and
so does the size of the candle’s tails or shadows. As noted earlier, for
example, a small green candle with a long upper tail is more bearish than a
red candle with a long lower tail.

Figure 2.1: The story of a candle, its various parts, and what they signify.

The closing level is also very crucial and should be looked at in
comparison to the highs and lows of the candle.

Try to keep in mind the following factors when you read candles:

1. Candle colour: Green is bullish and bulls are the winners; red is
bearish and the bears are victorious.

2. Size of candle body: Bigger the body, bigger the victory of the winning
side.

3. Length of the candle shadow: Longer the shadow, bigger the
retracement from the extreme, and thus stronger the rejection of that
extreme level.

4. Candle closing level: Never judge a candle before it closes. A candle’s
closing value is very important and any interpretation derived without
taking this into consideration could be incorrect.



Markets are all about spotting opportunities and a clearer and deeper
understanding of your subject increases your chances of success manifold.
So, let’s dig deeper still.

The market is flooded with books that talk about technical indicators;
sometimes an entire book is devoted to just one indicator. Our aim here is
different. We will not get into candle patterns that are commonly known,
with names such as stars, harami, engulfs, hammer, hanging man, two
crows, three mountains, four soldiers, and what not. The list is endless.
Fifty or more of these names are common. Is it practically possible to
identify all of these patterns in real time in a fast running market? We don’t
believe so.

So sticking to our promise of keeping things simple, we will capture the
entire theory in a practical way and will focus only on 3 main candle
formations. Yes, just 3 kinds of candle formations! What is important is that
we learn how to quickly recognise the psychology underlying these candle
formations in order to read the minds of the traders, and learn to take
calculated risks. Thereafter, minor variations will not matter if you
understand the underlying psychology behind the candle.

Understanding the market emotion is crucial because that is what creates
a tailwind. In turn, the tailwind generates the boost to sustain momentum,
and that’s when you get big moves with a solid follow through. And, that’s
where the money lies.

3 Types of Candles — and What They Reveal
about the Market’s Mind

There are three main types of candles that we shall focus on:

1. Candles that are under-sized, namely XXS-sized candles, or Lilliput
candles.

2. Giant-sized candles, or XXL-sized, or super-sized candles.



3. Candles with extraordinarily long shadows or tails on either side;
we call them rejection or reversal candles.

Typically, most candles have regular bodies and tail sizes, exhibiting
normal amount of bull or bear sentiment. These three types of candles are
different from the others.

We will begin our study with under-sized candles, which are significantly
smaller than typical candles. We will then move on to supersized candles,
which are bigger than the regular ones. Finally, we will consider long-tail
candles, which derive their significance from their tails rather than the body.
We will see how to interpret all these three types, and how to use them to
our benefit.

Under-sized / Lilliput / XXS-Sized Candles
When we say super-sized or under-sized candles, it is always in comparison
to the average size of the previous many candles. There is no formula for
defining it but visual interpretation should suffice for a trader.

A Lilliput candle is one where the price difference between the opening
level and the closing level is much smaller than for the previous many
candles. Depending on whether the candle is green or red, you can say who
is winning. But no matter which side is winning the battle, the win size, or
the move, is very small and there is no alarming action anywhere. This is
not all bad. In fact, it’s healthy. You cannot have a major move every single
day or every single hour. There are various interpretations and uses of such
candles.

Doji Candles — A Variation of Lilliput Candles

These are a minor variation, or subset, of the Lilliput candles. In the case of
a Doji candle, the body is not just small, it’s almost negligible in size. The
opening and closing prices are almost the same, or extremely close to each
other. The range may be mildly wide or narrow, but the real body looks



almost like a single horizontal line instead of looking like a rectangle. If
every candle is a battle between bulls and bears, then doji candles signify a
match that ends in a draw. The candle body indicates neither a bull victory
nor a bear victory because the price closes almost where it opened. If the
tail is exceptionally long then the case is different, and we will cover this
when we discuss rejection candles a little later.

Generally, small body and small tail candles indicate a phase of pause.
They suggest indecisiveness amongst participants other than when there is a
special or a different message coming from the extraordinary length of
upper or lower tails. So long as Lilliput candles have regular sized tails,
they show a neutral bias among market participants.

For better clarity, review Figure 2.2.

Figure 2.2: Under-sized Lilliput candles and the Doji candles.

Super-sized / Giant / XXL-Sized Candles



We have already learnt that every candle represents a battle between bulls
and bears. It is the closing value of the candle that decides the winner.
When bulls successfully and decisively wrestle the bears down to the mat,
they take the closing price much higher from the open compared to an
average sized victory. That is when you get giant green candles or
supersized green candles. On the other hand when bears maul the bulls in a
big way, you get super-sized red candles. A super-sized candle shows a
massive landslide victory for the winning side and, consequently, a strong
market emotion driving it. Please note that it is the size of the candle’s body
that we are talking about here, and not the size of the shadows.

Average sized candles do not convey any special message other than
quiet continuations, or minor retracements, of the current direction. But
when you see super-sized candles, that’s when you should immediately sit
up and take notice. It could be a breakout. Or, it could be a reversal. It could
be a new start, or it could be an end to the current trend, or even a
consolidation. It would also mean that there is a high probability of seeing
further levels in the direction of the big candle. It could be the time to act.
One must not get frozen into inaction upon seeing such eruptions. This is
the time to pull the trading trigger and shoot your enemy. Or get shot if the
candle is positioned against you. So one must show agility and take quick
action when giant candles appear. No second thoughts allowed here.

“When you gotta shoot; shoot, don’t talk.”
— Tuco in the Good, the Bad, the Ugly*.!

At times a giant candle may cover, or envelop, several earlier candles
within its own range, either partly or fully. The bigger the coverage, the
stronger is the impact of the oncoming move. So this is a type of candle that
we must always be on the look out for and act upon. How should we act
upon it, and when? That we will discover as we proceed ahead.

The shadows of giant candles — the upper as well as the lower shadow
— could either be normal or similar in size as those of most of the adjacent
candles, or they could be exceptionally short, or even absent for that matter.

If the giant candle is a green one, and if the tails are negligible in size, it
shows that the candle moved higher after opening, and that there was hardly



any downward move after the opening. It also shows that the candle closed
near its highest value for the given time period.

If, on the other hand, the giant candle is red in colour and its tails are
negligible, it means that the prices started falling right from the time the
candle began. There was no successful attempt to pull the price higher and
the price closed at the period’s lowest levels.

These factors will add to the candle’s bullishness, or its bearishness, as
the case may be. Such a candle shows the level of grip the participants have
over the move. It could be a partial grip, or a total grip as mentioned above.
The bigger the body and smaller the tail, the stronger is the control.
Basically, giant candles show strong momentum, and such momentum does
not die away easily. Because of the strong momentum depicted by a big
candle with a negligible tail, you can expect further move in the same
direction. What one must remember is that whenever a given candle closes
at or near one of its extreme ends, it depicts price acceptance by the
participants. This means that the market participants are willing to accept
price on that side or that extreme end, and may even accept further moves
in the same direction in the next candle.

You can see a pictorial presentation of the significance of giant candles in
Figure 2.3, which shows regular sized tails, or small, negligible tails. But
what if these shadows or tails are extra long? Well, that’s a very important
type of formation and deserves a separate title; we call them reversal
candles or rejection candles.



Figure 2.3: What giant, super-sized or XXL candle mean.

Reversal or Rejection Candles
Extra long-shadow candles can be aptly named as reversal or rejection
candles. Such candles will have either a long top shadow or a long bottom
shadow or, at times, even both. The body of the candle could be green or
red, small or big, it doesn’t matter. Their distinguishing mark is their
shadow. Now obviously green is bullish and red is bearish, but the key
message of such candles is derived from what their tail is telling us. These
candles depict strong directional bias and should never be seen as neutral,
no matter the size and colour of the body. The tale lies in the tail.

A long bottom tail shows that the closing price level of the candle has
been arrived at after a sizeable upward pullback from the lows that were
made during the candle period. In other words, the extreme lower end of the
price that was once touched could not be sustained. It saw buyers rushing in
to grab the stock, whereupon the falling price found support and the fall got



arrested. We expect higher levels ahead depending on the larger picture and
a strong follow through. Those who sold at lower levels in anticipation of a
further fall in prices are now trapped. A long bottom tail candle pattern,
added to a green body colour, is super bullish. This interpretation, derived
as it is from a rejection of lower price and a long bottom tail, remains valid
even if the candle is red. The candle body will usually be located in the top
or upper end of the candle range. Even a Doji, which is otherwise
considered neutral, will be seen as a bullish candle provided the lower tail is
long.

Conversely, a long top tail shows that the extreme top level touched
during the candle formation was then immediately rejected by the market
participants who obviously believed that the price was getting stretched too
far up and must go lower. Supply pressure then came in, and the price
drifted lower. Any bulls who might have tried buying at the top are now
trapped. If such candles also see a follow-through on the downside, then
RIP bulls!

Thus, a Lilliput candle with a long top shadow and with a red body adds
to the bearishness, and the larger the red body, the more is the implied
bearishness. The bearish interpretation stays valid even in the case of a
green candle with a long top shadow. Even if it is a Doji, the candle with a
long top tail is said to be very bearish, and is not seen as neutral.

What one must remember is that long tails represent price rejection. A top
tail represents rejection of higher prices, while a bottom tail represents
rejection of lower levels. These rejections increase the chances of the next
candle moving in the other direction, as graphically brought out in Figure
2.4.



Figure 2.4: Long tails.

Apart from the above three types, other candles would fall under the
category of a regular candle, suggesting normal bullishness or bearishness
as the case and the colour may be. We have shown a normal candle in
Figure 2.3. Do check it out.

Combined, the above insights should suffice to enable you to rank the
bullishness or bearishness of any kind of candle or situation. And that is all
that matters. This reduces the 50+ types of candles to just 3 main types,
making this tool both much more comprehensible and much more effective.

Consider the candlestick chart in Figure 2.5 to review all that we have
studied about candles, and how they look in real time markets.

Going ahead we will learn how to make use of all the information that a
candle pattern offers us with the help of charts showing real market moves.



Figure 2.5: Variations in candles — body sizes and tail appearances.

Key Points for Accurate Candle Reading

Let the Candle Form Fully Before You Start
Interpreting It
Before judging any candle, it is very important to allow it to fully form till
the close. Your entire view or interpretation of the candle can reverse by the
time a candle closes compared to your view when the candle begins to
form. A candle that initially looks to be highly bullish, or even signal a
breakout, can turn out to be a temporary top. A candle that seemed like a
fresh breakdown may turn out to be the exact opposite if a long bottom tail
gets formed.

It is the closing of the candle that will tell us what to expect next. Always
keep this in mind and be patient.



Before Looking for a Trend Reversal Signal, Look for a Trend

Reversal candles need a very well defined and clearly visible prior trend to
reverse from. It is important that you clearly understand what’s happening
around you before jumping to decisions. Also, always keep in mind that
reversal patterns which appear at important price levels are the really
important ones, and should be heeded strongly. The ones that appear at
other places might not lead to the expected results or reversals.

Candles Work Better on Comparatively Longer Time Frame Charts

For example, a 5-minute candle chart will be more reliable than a 1- or 2-
minute candle chart. And a daily or a 15-minute candle chart will be more
reliable than a 5-minute candle chart. This is not to say that you cannot
trade smaller time frames. The point is, longer the time that a candle takes
in forming, larger is the number of participants involved in its formation.
And, so, bigger is the amount of emotion involved in it. The same applies to
chart study. Higher time frames bring in higher reliability. All time frames
can be traded, and all of them work equally well if you know how to use
them. What suits you will depend on your mental make-up.

You Don’t Have to Take the Very First Trade that Comes in View

Just because the markets are open does not mean you have to take the very
first trade that appears. You always have the choice not to do so. Make
sensible use of that choice. Filters, filters and more filters should be used
before making a financial commitment to a trading position or a trading
call. As we move on, you will see how we test each scrip or chart, even
before we allow its inclusion in our daily watch-list.

Always Wait for Pattern Confirmation

Most chart patterns require a confirmation before they work out fruitfully.
Wait for that confirmation to come in the time frame you have chosen.
There is no rush. There should not be. The share bazaar teaches us: “Never



chase trades. Ek jayegi, toh dusri aayegi (If one opportunity goes away,
another one will come along). So always enter a trade after a confirmation
and not before that. If a particular candle pattern requires an additional
candle to form before confirmation can be obtained, so be it.

Location Where the Pattern Forms is Very Important

The right location adds to the success probability of a pattern or a candle.
We have already seen that corrections often find support at the moving
average lines in an uptrend. During a downtrend, resistance comes in when
a counter trend up move meets a moving average line lying overhead. It can
be the 20MA, 50MA, or 200MA, or any other MA line. If these lines indeed
provide support or resistance, then the original trend should resume from
there. Accordingly, any kind of reversal patterns or candles that form at
these levels should be watched closely and should be accorded higher
importance in comparison to the same patterns occurring anywhere else.
MA lines are areas of probable reversals, and a counter trend reversal
occurring there is a strong indication that the trend may soon resume. So a
fresh buying interest in an uptrend, and a strong supply pressure in a
downtrend, can come in at these locations (see Figures 2.6 and 2.7).

Figure 2.6: The counter trend moves find support at the 20MA (pink) line in this chart of
Bata India. You can see giant trending candles appearing from there on. You can also see



rejection candles that put an end to the corrections. Their locations make these candles more
powerful and reliable.

Figure 2.7: Consolidations end at the MA line, — and giant candles take the price higher
exactly from there in this chart of ABB. The 3MA lines in this chart are 20MA, 50MA, and

200MA.

Always, therefore, check the location where a reversal pattern or
candle is forming in order to gauge its relevance. Other important
locations are the floor pivot levels, which we will consider in the next
chapter, or the previous day’s closing level, swing turning points and the
prior highs and lows formed on the charts. It is amazing to see how the
probability of success for a chart or a candle pattern increases when the
pattern forms at any of these crucial levels. So, always remember that in
order of priority the location comes first, and then the pattern. If you
fail to follow this order, your results could be random.

Timing of the Pattern



If you are one of those who sits in front of the trading screen regularly, then
you may immediately relate to this point. There are particular time periods
of the day when the market, and its constituent major stocks, begin to make
the day’s decisive directional moves. These time zones are high probability
periods when the market or the stock which was earlier just loitering around
or doing nothing very much will start making meaningful moves.
Depending on the larger picture, the move could be in the direction of the
trend or it could be a reversal. So any kind of a reversal or breakout pattern
that either appears or starts getting confirmed at these times should be taken
immediate note of and acted upon. In the Indian context, we can divide the
current market operating hours into the following time zones:

9:00 a.m. to 9:15 a.m. — Market pre-open time zone. A trader who is
serious about his work will always pay attention to all the local as well
global setup that he wakes up with, and for any events, news, signals, cues
before the markets open. In fact, he would be on his desk much before this
time, going through his pre-market preparations and bringing himself in
tune with the flow of events around.

9:15 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. — The first hour is crucially important and will
give emphatic directional moves in many stocks. These moves may either
be continuation of moves that had started the previous day, or may be the
result of overnight news flow which the stock or the market will
immediately try to price in. This is a period of hectic activity and will
demand your complete attention and a very high degree of concentration.
This is an action-packed time and the moves occurring within this time
period require trading agility.

Try to recall what it takes for the players of the television show, KBC or
Kaun Banega Crorepati, to make it to the hot seat: Fastest fingers first,
remember? This first hour is similar, and it is only for the fastest and the
best players. I remember one of my favourite quotes from school days:
Patience during planning, and impatience (read nimbleness, agility) during
execution can work miracles. The early morning markets require exactly
that. If you are ready with your pre-market prep, then this could be the time
to pull the trading trigger on many days.

10:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. — This could be a quieter period. That doesn’t
mean there won’t be any important moves emerging at these times. There



could well be but the level of aggression at display here is different. As the
news flow keep coming every hour in the market, there will be newer
moves as well. The amount of work and attention required will depend on
your trading tactics and the number of stocks you follow. But you will often
see a high number of stocks simply loitering around during this time.

1:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. — This will again be a high pressure time and
will demand your undivided attention. Moves beginning during this period
may decide the final direction for the day; the day’s closing level and the
day’s trend.

Thus it is important to be alert as to which pattern or candle is appearing
at what time of the day. Patterns appearing at more crucial times should be
paid very close attention and should be acted upon quickly. You can have
stronger conviction on the moves originating at these times. So always pay
attention to a pattern’s timing and choose only the patterns during high
probability time periods for trading. Always remember one thing; money
must flow in easily. We are not here to fight with the market, but to flow
with it.

A Single Candle Doesn’t a Story Make

The market never accomplishes anything with a single price swing or a
single candle. If a stock has started moving in one particular direction, and
if the move is genuine and not a false alarm, then it will continue for some
more time, a few more swings, or a few more candles. The story doesn’t
end with a single candle whether on the up side or the down side. It is only
when the market moves in one direction for a tradeable period of time that
it makes sense to make a commitment. If the stock or index under study is
making one green candle followed by a red one, which is again followed by
a green candle and then another red one, the market may be lacking
conviction — and this can make you miserable. If you keep seeing this
phenomenon, it is a signal that you better stay out of that move. In other
words, the longer moves are the ones which are more tradeable and every
meaningful beginning in a longer move will give a good follow through.



Multiple Favourable Factors Lead to Moves that Sustain

More the factors in favour of your trade, the higher is the probability that
the move will sustain longer. A meaningful move in the stock or the index
will often sustain till it attains at least 3, or 5, or even 8 candles in the same
direction. This is equally applicable to chart patterns.

For example, when the price moves above an MA line from below it, and
finds support at the MA line on retracement for the first time, there is a
strong possibility that it will do the same a few more times. Without these
follow throughs, there cannot be meaningful breakthroughs (see Figure
2.8).

Figure 2.8: The price moves from below the MA line to above it and finds support at the
20MA line for the first time. The move, however, doesn’t end there, and you can see the price

taking support at the MA line many more times.

New Trends Give Higher Probability Trades

Entering a newly starting trend affords a higher probability of success than
entering one that has been around for a while (see Figure 2.9). The reason is
simple. Those who got in early will be tempted to book profits at higher
levels, or at lower levels if it is downtrend. The better your timing of entry,



the higher your chances of a successful trade. Therefore always remember
that the entry signals that appear after a fall, and from a nearby
support, have higher probability of working out in the immediate term
— which is our time frame as day traders — compared to the same signal
appearing after a huge surge of few days, and with a resistance nearby. In
other words, the location, the prior move, the pattern timing and a strong
follow through are all needed to be in your favour, and that’s what good
trades are made of.

Figure 2.9: Bigger corrections can take place after the completion of big moves. Best entries
are available at the start of a new trend on minor dips because these dips are not really deep,

and may soon see trend resumption, as shown.

Trading with a Trend Carries a Higher Probability of Success

Any move that appears on the trending side will have a higher probability
of working out successfully, compared to a counter trend corrective move.
Now, that doesn’t mean that we should never trade against the trend but
such counter trend moves should be restricted to specific trade setups which
we will discuss ahead. In general, staying with the trend is the smarter thing
to do.



Much of your fortune can be lost if you try to control the markets or fight
the trend, i.e. if you hold onto your opinion — and hope and pray — even
as the market is going against it. This behaviour shows that you are trading
without a proper understanding of trade tactics. One must be aligned not
just with the trading time frame trend, but also with the trend in a higher
time frame. When the price action aligns in all time frames, the moves
occur smoothly and sustain longer. Remember, money must flow in easily.
Close attention should be paid not just to the higher time frame trend, but
also to the supports and resistances in those time frames, because those
supports and resistances are indeed strong.

Check the Volume

Volume definitely plays a role and if it is above average as the move
appears in the direction in which you are planning to enter a trade, that
works in your favour and increases the chances of your success. Any price
breakout move that begins with a huge volume breakout will have higher
odds of success, and higher chances of seeing a follow through.

50% Counter Trend Limit for Ongoing Trends

A trend remains trustworthy till the time the retracements or the counter
trend moves stay within a certain limit. Beyond that limit, the quality of the
trend turns doubtful. There are various theories that propagate various
threshold limits. As a part of our trading tactics, we will maintain this limit
at 50%.

What this means is that if a given trend has to sustain, then the counter
trend moves should not erase more than 50% of the trending move. So long
as the market or the scrip concerned takes two steps forward and only one
step back, you can keep faith with it. Any retracement beyond this threshold
limit should make you doubt the very existence and continuation of the
trend. If the move is being observed on the chart, say from a swing low to a
swing high, then the retracement must stay within 50% of that rise.



Correspondingly, in a downtrend any retracement move on the upside
should also stay within this 50% limit. If a giant green candle has appeared
in the direction of the trend, then the next few candles might be counter
trend and corrective candles, but these should not erase more than 50%, i.e.
half, of the prior giant candle. If it does, the validity of that big green candle
becomes questionable. A minor retracement, on the other hand, is normal,
expected and should be healthy. It also gives you another opportunity to
enter in the direction of the trend — and at a better price.

The point is that the retracement should not get so large that it leads to
loss of control for the winning side. This is very important. As they say in
life, all human relationships that maintain themselves within boundaries of
respect stand a better chance of continuing longer. Similarly, every
retracement of a trend should stay within a threshold for the trend to
continue to look good for more. Have a look at Figure 2.10, and then check
out the same rule in a real example from the market in Figures 2.11 and
2.12.

Figure 2.10: Acceptable and unacceptable levels of retracement.



Figure 2.11: Look how the counter trend corrective moves in Adani Enterprises remain
limited in size. The corrections do not erase more than 50% of the uptrending move which

started with the giant green candle. Soon after the corrective moves, a green candle reappears
and the trend resumes and sustains nicely.

Figure 2.12: Jain Irrigation resumes its up move after a 50% correction.



All of these factors are important. The higher the number of positive
factors on your side, the better is the chance you stand to win big time. In
Chapter 3, we will look at the implementation of our candle study. We will
learn how, when, and where to use each of these candle types. Before that,
let’s revise all 12 important candle characteristics that we have studied in
this chapter.

Summary of important Points for Accurate Candle Reading

1. Never judge a candle before it closes.
2. A clear prior trend is important for a meaningful reversal.
3. Higher the time frame, higher the accuracy and reliability.
4. Use sufficient filters before a trade commitment; choose only the best

trading opportunities.
5. Look for confirmation of a candle signal before making a trade

commitment.
6. Location of the candle is extremely important and must be looked at

carefully.
7. Pattern timing is crucial; choose high probability timings for better

success.
8. Nothing is accomplished in a single candle — it usually takes 3, 5 or 8

candles.
9. Newer trends are more profitable to trade than the more matured ones.

10. Trades with the trend are superior to trading counter trend moves.
11. Volume support makes a big difference, it must be checked.
12. Never forget the 50% retracement rule; the retracement must stay within

the 50% limit for the trend to continue for longer.

Milestones Covered
1. The two (2) colours the body of a candle can have — green (white) and

red (black), and their interpretation.
2. Five (5) important variations the candle body can have, namely, Giant,

Lilliput (Tiny), Rejection, Regular, Doji.



3. Four (4) major variations in the tail lengths of candles — long, very
short, regular, absent.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 3

OceanofPDF.com



Trading With Candles

Writers at Work
Ashwani Gujral: Achha ek baat suno. English bilkul simple rakha karo. Shashi

Tharoorwali nahi chahiye — Mind you, keep the language simple, not like Shashi
Tharoor’s.

Rachana: That’s a good one . . . Tharoorwali . . . No worries, will definitely take care.
Ashwani Gujral: Now you can go and enjoy your Sunday.
Rachana: Sir, I am at my desk reading many interesting things, and will be working till 5

p.m.
Ashwani Gujral: Yes that’s exactly what I meant by enjoy your Sunday. That’s the right

way to spend a weekend.
Rachana: Oh, . . . Sure Sir, thank you.

In this chapter we will consider the various ways of trading the three main
types of candles we studied in Chapter 2. We will find out:

1. Where to look for each of the three types of candles.
2. In what kind of markets should one pay more attention to them, and

under what context do they become extremely crucial.
3. When to trade them.
4. How to trade them.

How to Trade Lilliput (XXS-Sized) Candles

Lilliput Candles Often Lead to Volcanic Eruptions

We have learnt that markets move through phases of contraction and
expansion. It is here that the secret of money making lies. Every phase of



expansion is followed by a phase of contraction, and every contraction will,
sooner or later, erupt into an explosion. Very often contraction phases are
full of Lilliput candles, and new expansion phases often erupt from these
small candles. If there are many Lilliput candles around, then there will
hardly be any trending move and the stock or the market will move
sideways, rather than go up or down and you’ll see more traders at the
coffee machines and water coolers than on their trading desks. At such
times, there is said to be a lack of institutional buying or selling, or any
major action by any big players. This could, however, well be the calm
before the storm.

We must keenly observe these range bound markets and we can even
trade them provided the range is wide enough. At other times, we will wait
for such a phase to dissolve and look for the next phase of expansion to take
over. Erupting after a contraction, an expansion phase can give us a big
directional move.

A contraction requires you to maintain tight stop losses based on the
width of the range. That, in turn, allows you to enter the eruption trade with
relatively small risk. Should the eruption see a decent follow through, then
not just your first target but even the second and third targets can be met.
This is how we use Lilliput candles — for entering big trades, when a
range gets broken.

For a long trade, we will enter right on the breakout, — and immediately
on the breakdown for a short trade. The entry must be made as soon as the
range is broken.

In the chart in Figure 3.1, you can see that the stock was previously in a
very narrow range. So when the breakout finally happens, the stock is
coming out of a range of more than a day. This releases the stock’s coiledup
energy with great force, and there are higher chances of seeing a decent
follow through during the rest of the day. This is especially true in this case
as the narrow range of the previous 2 or 3 days was not showing any erratic
or wild swings.



Figure 3.1: Have a look at this chart and see how the tiny Lilliput candles lead to a near-
vertical eruption. You will find such trades when the contraction phase featuring Lilliput

candles ends leading to an eruption on either side.

Lilliput Candles Also Help Us Trade Trend Continuations

Lilliput candles may also appear in trending markets or in an expansion
phase, as can be seen in Figure 3.2. The appearance of these small candles
in a newly started trend, or in a strong ongoing trend, has a special
significance when they are surrounded by comparatively larger neighbours.



Figure 3.2: This IDBI chart shows how we can use Lilliput candles by waiting for the end of a
contraction phase — and then trade the expansion that follows. One can enter short on the

breakdown.

Let us assume that you are looking for an entry into a strong uptrend.
Midway, you see a tiny red candle. This candle shows that there was a
minor dip in price but the buyers immediately came back in to absorb the
selling. This prompted the price to start rising again. This is an opportunity.
The opportunity is even stronger if the red candle is formed at or around the
top end of the previous green candle. That would show that only a minor
part of the price got erased and that support came in quickly thereafter. In
such a case we can safely assume that the market or the scrip is simply
gathering itself for the next leap forward. This gets confirmed if the next
candle, or the one thereafter, takes out the high of the small red candle. That
is when we enter the trend.

We take such entries when the trend has a very strong momentum and we
are not expecting a major dip, or even a time correction. In an uptrend,
entry can be made once the high of the red counter trend candle is taken
out. Conversely, in a downtrend you enter when the low of the counter trend



green candle is taken down. Have a look at the charts in Figure 3.3 and
Figure 3.4, respectively, for a better clarity of the concept.

Figure 3.3: Trading a trend using Lilliput candles. The tiny red candles appearing midway
offer a fresh opportunity to board the upmoving train, especially because this candle appears at

the higher end of its neighbour on the left.

Figure 3.4: A tiny green candle appearing midway in a downtrend offers a fresh opportunity
to board the trend, especially when the tiny green candle appears at the lower of the preceding



red candle.

This is how we can use Lilliput candles to enter an ongoing trend.

Lilliput Candles Can Also Signal an End to the Current Leg of a Move

There is one important caveat to note here. If the uptrend has reached a near
term top — or bottom in the case of a downtrend — and you see the
appearance of tiny candles there, then there may not be any trend
resumption. In such a case we will see a reversal of the trend instead of any
further move in the original direction. If the minor pullbacks, as shown by
these small candles, do not lead to just a temporary halt, they will lead to a
reversal sooner than later. Such an occurrence is more likely when these
candles appear at some crucial level of resistance in an uptrend, or support
during downtrends.

Let’s say the trend was up and you have already seen a sizeable up move.
You then see tiny candles appearing at some kind of a resistance level. In
such a case we assume that the small body may be showing a loss of
momentum. If the momentum doesn’t pick up in the same direction again
sooner or later, it may well do so in the opposite direction. And if the trend
is indeed going to reverse, then you would see the appearance of bigger
candles of the opposite colour, which would signify reversal.

The tiny candles give similar interpretations even when they appear at the
end of a counter trend corrective move. At such times they may signal an
end to the correction, and a probable trend resumption. Have a look at both
cases as shown in the charts in Figures 3.5 and 3.6, respectively.



Figure 3.5: Have a look at how the narrow candles can lead to a reversal of the current trend
when they do not lead to a resumption of the trend. This is more probable after an extended

move in one direction, and from levels of hindrance, whether support or resistance.

Figure 3.6: You can see how Lilliput red candles keep counter trend corrective moves within
limits, and lead to trend resumption sooner rather than later. A trend resumption move often

originates from support levels, and has bigger sized candles.



Thus, the mighty Lilliput candles are important everywhere:

1. In a new trend starting by way of a breakout / breakdown of range.
2. In boarding an ongoing trend.
3. In signalling an end to a trending move when it reaches an obstacle, or

gets over-extended and loses momentum.
4. In signalling an end to a corrective move when the correction reaches

levels of support or resistance.

What Giant (XXL) Candles Reveal — and How to
Trade Them
Depending on the location of their appearance, giant candles have
altogether different interpretations from Lilliput candles. A giant candle has
a large body connoting that the difference between its opening and closing
prices is huge. That in itself directly implies a major shift in the sentiment
of market participants during the candle formation period. As described
earlier, it takes a strong rush of active buyers, who bring along strong
conviction and bullishness, to create a huge green candle. To create a big
red candle, it takes an equally strong rush of sellers willing to dump the
stock at any price.

Giant candles offer three main cues to traders. Let us consider each of the
three.

Giant Candles that Begin a New Move

In case an XXL-sized or giant bullish candle is seen after a major fall or a
correction, we can assume that a near term bottom has been formed and the
trend has reversed. This assumption takes on greater significance when the
candle is formed at an important level of support. It becomes even more
important if the same happens after some degree of base building process,
or some sort of a sideways move. We can then safely say that the support is



being perceived by the participants as a near term bottom. Thus, when such
a candle appears after a down move and post a sideways consolidation or a
base building process, or near some important support, it strengthens our
conviction all the more. Such a giant candle will lead to a breakout from
that narrow range or base in most cases.

At other times, giant candles can even lead to a V-shaped reversal and
thus signify a sharp turn which could be either the start of a new trend or a
strong counter trend move. Such a candle shows that the momentum is huge
and is not going to die down soon. Active players have the capacity to take
prices further. Of course, it’s important to remember that markets do not
achieve anything meaningful in just one candle. There is a high probability
of a follow through as more and more participants who see the prices rising
will want their own share of the rise. Say, it’s a sudden upturn from down.
Seeing this the bears who had shorted the scrip at a lower level will
definitely get jittery and rush for cover, and thus add to the bullish mood
merely out of fear. Giant candles can start a new trend in this manner and it
makes sense to enter the trade on the trending side. Let us understand this
on a few charts.

The first is an example where a huge red candle begins a new downtrend
after a good up move (see Figure 3.7). We believe in this giant red candle
strongly because it appears at a level of resistance and also after an
extended up move. We can expect more downfall ahead and look for a good
entry using either this candle itself or the next one. If the down move starts
with a range breakdown, we enter at the breakdown level. Such a giant
candle, of a colour contrary to the ongoing trend, often signals an end to the
ongoing trend and the beginning of a new one with a bang.



Figure 3.7: The earlier trend was down, and then came a green giant candle. That signalled
the beginning of a new uptrend, especially as it happened around a support and after an

extended down move.

Figure 3.8: The earlier trend was up but nearing a resistance as shown by the appearance of
rejection candles. The big red candle — note that it’s of the opposite colour to that of the

current trend — leads to a V-shaped reversal.



Trend Compatible Giant Candle Often Ends an Ongoing Trend

A giant candle of the same colour as the trend can also appear after a
sizeable trending move. Being of the same colour, it is in the direction of
the current trend. When this happens it could be a sign that the current trend
would soon be nearing an end and the price may start reversing as soon as a
strong resistance, if it is an uptrend, or a strong support, if it is downtrend
appears close by. This doesn’t mean that you immediately get into a reverse
trade. It simply means you stay alert for any additional signs that confirm
this possibility. For example, in Figure 3.8 you can see the formation of a
base that finally breaks on the opposite side to the current trend, which may
even lead to a sharp reversal. In such situations, these XXL-sized giant
candles are the springboard for a final leap by the trend, much like a tired
athlete putting in a final burst of energy near the finishing line. The move
might begin with a gap on the given day. If the trend does indeed reverse
after that, then it can be said to have worked as an exhaustion gap. There
wouldn’t be much of a follow through to the up move the day after the giant
candle. In fact, at times you may also get to see some significant amount of
topping, or bottoming, here. The examples of Figure 3.9 and Figure 3.10
will help you understand this better.



Figure 3.9: After an extended uptrend, the big green candle appearing close to a resistance
ends the trend soon after its appearance. You can enter a short trade on the break down.

Figure 3.10: The giant red candle after a big fall signifies the final sell-off. Small green
candles and a reversal red candle lead slowly to a new trend. Go long on breakout early

morning.

Giant Candle Can Lead to Sharp Corrections Midway in a Trend

Very often you will see giant candles of the opposite colour to the ongoing
trend appearing midway in the trend. Let us say you see a big red candle in
the middle of a strong uptrend. These can lead to sharp and sudden
corrections midway (see Figure 3.11) in a trend. You can enter a trade when
the correction ends and the trend resumes from some important level of
support. At times the trend resumes slowly, with multiple small candles of
the same colour as the trend. At other times, the trend may resume equally
sharply with another big candle of the trending colour (green in the case of
Figure 3.12) which leads to a 180-degree turn from the correction.



Figure 3.11: This chart of Ashok Leyland shows a sharp midway correction by a
comparatively large red candle. But the high of that candle is taken out the very next day, and

so the ongoing trend continues.

Figure 3.12: This chart of Asian Paints shows a sharp upsurge in the middle of a downtrend
at the appearance of a giant green candle, followed immediately by the resumption of the

ongoing downtrend in the next candle.



For example, suppose a comparatively large bearish red candle appears in
an uptrend, but the immediate next candle is again bullish (green) and
crosses above the high of red candle. This would lead to a sharp price
upturn. The important thing to watch out for is that the bearish giant red
candle must not have erased more than 50% of the previous up move. If it
has, the trend becomes weak and doubtful.

Thus, the XXL-sized candles or giant candles are important in three
ways:

1. In starting a new trend with a bang.
2. In putting an end to the ongoing trend by way of a final blow-off, or

bottom, as the case may be.
3. In giving sharp corrective moves during an ongoing trend, which may

then resume equally sharply as soon as the brief correction ends.

Let us now move on to rejection candles and see how to use these in our
daily trading.

How to Trade Rejection Candles

Rejection Candle Can End an Ongoing Trend

As we learnt earlier, candles with extremely long tails are rejection candles.
The long tail formed in the candle shows that during the formation period
the price reached a far higher, or lower, level, but that level could not be
sustained and was immediately rejected by market participants who
believed it to be too over-stretched. That should generally lead to a reversal
of the current trend. Thus, these rejection candles are also called reversal
candles and often signal an end to the move in the ongoing direction. If a
rejection candle succeeds in doing so, and gets a followthrough in the
opposite direction, then it begins a new trend.



Let us assume that the current trend is up and has already made a sizeable
move. You now see a rejection candle with a long upper tail appearing. That
is a sign to get cautious. You may not straightaway exit the long trade that
you might be in. Neither should you go short quite yet. But if you see
another red candle taking down the low of the rejection candle, that’s the
time to exit your longs and, probably, even go short. The latter option will
be determined by the larger picture.

Rejection Candle Can End a Corrective Counter Trend

If you see a long bottom tail candle at a support during a corrective down
move in an ongoing uptrend, you can expect the uptrend to resume soon.
This rejection candle is about to bring an end to the corrective move, as
support comes in and buyers rush in at lower levels. If the next candle is
green, and if it takes out the high of the previous rejection candle, then it is
time to enter long again.

Conversely, if you see a rejection candle with long top tail at a resistance
during a corrective up move in an ongoing downtrend, you can expect the
down move to resume soon.

All such moves will work out more accurately when seen in conjunction
with some other tools and parameters which we will come to as we march
forward. The general principle is that we will take trades only post a
confirmation. Thus:

In the case of a bottom rejection, we enter long only after we get a
confirmation of an upside reversal.
In a top rejection, we enter short only after the down move seems well
in place.

A close look at the charts in Figure 3.13, Figure 3.14, Figure 3.15 and
Figure 3.16 will help you understand these points better.



Figure 3.13: A rejection candle after a major correction — and the subsequent reversal from
down to up.

Figure 3.14: After an upsurge, there appears a rejection candle with a long top tail — note
the subsequent reversal from up to down.



Figure 3.15: In this chart of LIC Housing Finance, the rejection candle comes at the end of
the correction, and leads to trend resumption.

Figure 3.16: The rejection candle in this chart of Mindtree leads to a reversal. The midway
counter trend up move also ends with the appearance of repeated rejection candles — and the

fall continues.



Thus:

1. Rejection candles lead to fresh moves that begin when the prior trend
ends once the stock refuses to go further in the same direction.

2. Rejection candles lead to trend resumption as well when the given stock
refuses to correct any further after some retracement, when there
appears demand / supply from crucial levels, and you see a follow-
through on the trending side.

Milestones Covered
Let us recapitulate all that we’ve learnt about candles so far:

We began with the anatomy of candles.
We then considered the three main types of candles of our interest,
namely giant or XXL candles, Lilliput or XXS candles, and rejection
candles.
In addition, we also studied the Doji candle.
We classified all other candles together as regular candles.
We learnt how a Lilliput candle can give volcanic moves and how it can
also appear during minor pull-backs, during consolidations, and even
when the current trend nears its end.
We saw how giant candles can appear at the start of a new trend or at
the end of a trend, and sometimes during sudden but short-lived counter
trend moves.
We have learnt how to interpret rejection candles and how to use these
candles to increase our probability of success by considering their
location, timing, volume, retracement, time frames, etc.

We’ll now move on to Chapter 4 which reveals our next building block,
namely floor pivots.

So take a deep breath. Fetch yourself a cup of coffee, come back and stay
tuned for more on market technicals.



OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 4

OceanofPDF.com



Trading Pivots — Part I

Floor Pivots

Introduction
Pivots are a crucial element in our overall intraday trading strategy. We
have already seen two important elements, namely candles and moving
averages. The pivot is the third one. In order to appreciate the trading cues
that pivots provide, we should first be clear about some often seen yet
rarely understood price patterns.

The market is constantly searching for the fair values of various
instruments in every changing situation. We will look at the different kinds
of market opening styles and their interpretations, and how a trader can use
these with profit in his daily trading. We will consider what morning range
is and how to use it. We will then consider the basics of floor pivots; how
the pivot levels are derived, and their basic characteristics. We will examine
how a trader should approach the high speed D-Street market every
morning using pivot levels as his milestones and guideline.

The Fair Valuation Concept
Markets facilitate trades between buyers and sellers. That is the essential
reason why markets exist. The price of any given security in the market will
always keep moving higher, or lower, in search of sellers and buyers,
respectively. If the initial price of a security is perceived to be too high by
the players, then it will go fall lower till it finds buyers. This is because
when the price is perceived as being too high, it attracts sellers who push
the price back lower. Then, as fresh buyers enter the market, their demand



takes the price higher. The price keeps rising higher so long as it keeps
finding buyers who are willing to purchase at higher and higher prices —
till the last buyer buys and gets in.

Correspondingly, the price would keep falling lower so long as there are
sellers willing to sell their offerings at lower and yet lower prices, till the
last seller sells out. When the price has fallen enough such sellers lose
interest, the price will again start rising. When it reaches a level where it
gets difficult to find buyers, it will again start falling.

During this entire process of trying to find the right price, namely the
price that keeps both the buyers and sellers happy and satisfied, the market
will keep shifting between the two phases of balance or consolidation, and
imbalance or trend. We have learnt this earlier, too, right, in Chapter 1.
When the price of a given stock is trading at a value that is perceived as
“fair” or “accurate” by both parties, that level will sustain for some time. A
higher price than the perceived fair value will attract sellers who will sell
and bring the price back to the value zone. Correspondingly, a fall from the
perceived fair value will bring in buyers whose buying will pull the price
higher and back towards the value area perceived by the market. Thus, the
actions of buyers and sellers serve to keep the price in a narrow band
around this value. This phase is called the balanced phase, or a phase of
consolidation.

During the phase of consolidation, you will see opportunities of trading
back and forth at the two ends of the value zone. The demand and supply
are in balance at such times. When one of these two, either the demand or
the supply, significantly exceeds the other we then see the price break out
either on the upper side of the range or on its lower side. This happens when
one of the sides begins to believe that the current price does not reflect the
correct value, and that the fair level is somewhere outside the current range.
The price won’t then consolidate around the current fair value but will
move strongly in one direction till the participants find a new fair value for
themselves. This phase of imbalance is called the trending phase.

During a trending phase, the price moves sharply in one direction. The
emotions of buyers and sellers are not in balance and the stronger party is
able to overrule the weaker side. During such phases of imbalance, or trend,
you will get opportunities to buy pull-backs during uptrends, and



opportunities to sell the rallies in downtrends. The move in one direction
will go on either till the opposing players muster enough strength to stop it,
and / or take the fight and the price to the opposite direction. This cycle of
moving from acceptance of fair value (balance) to rejection of current fair
value (imbalance), and then again acceptance (another balance or fair
pricing) is a constant process. We know these two phases as ranged market
phase and trending phase, and here we have seen the reason behind the
constant rotation of markets between these phases (see Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1: This is how the market or a stock move between trend and ranged phases as
participants seek to discover fair value.

How to Trade the Market’s Opening Ceremony
Every morning when the market’s opening bell rings it throws up signals to
those who can read them about the kind of day it might turn out to be and
the price action to be expected through the day. Which is why it’s important
to correctly read and interpret the message of the market’s opening bell.



There could be many variations in the opening style of the market but,
broadly speaking, you will see two kinds of opening trades:

The first kind is when the opening price ticks fall within the previous
day’s range, namely within the area between the previous day’s high
and low.
The second kind is when the opening price ticks fall outside the
previous day’s range, namely when the price either breaks out above the
previous day’s range or breaks down below it.

Trading the Opening that’s Within the Previous Day’s Range

When you see the opening ticks falling within the previous day’s range, you
can safely assume that reactive participants are at play. Typically, they will
trade the markets in such a way that the price will keep moving to and fro
between the upper and the lower boundaries of the range. If the opening
ticks have taken the price to either boundary of the range, then chances are
that the rest of the day may get spent in taking it to the other end. You can
thus expect the day to pan out within a band, and you can trade accordingly.
You can buy at the lower boundary with upper boundary as the target, or
you can sell at the top with the bottom level as the target. You can continue
doing this till the time either of the boundaries gets broken. This can happen
at any time during market hours on the same day, or in the coming days.

Trading the Opening that Breaks the Previous Day’s Range

When you see the market opening outside the previous day’s range, you
should know that it is time to be on your toes. That’s because you can
expect that the active market participants are gearing up for some
aggressive action. Observe for a while and check what the market does after
the first few ticks. You should see how the price is moving in relation to the
pivots.

The price may either move further from the opening levels in the
direction of opening, or it may retrace back. Or, it may hover around the
opening for a while before making up its mind about further action.



If the price opens above the range and builds on further from there, then
there are good chances that we may see much higher levels during the day
as characterised by active participants and their behaviour. These are the
days when you may probably see rocketing moves in the market or the scrip
under study. This kind of opening definitely signals an overnight change in
the sentiment of market participants. That does not mean that we will
necessarily jump the gun at the very first tick. There will be several
possibilities to examine and several parameters to use and gauge and
understand what exactly is happening; only then would we decide our
course of action (see Figures 4.2 and 4.3).

Figure 4.2: This L&T chart shows how the opening can signal a strong move. A slow effort to
start moving higher from the bottom end of the range was seen the previous day, and prices

had even closed higher. Then came an opening gap up the next morning, followed by the strong
up move.



Figure 4.3: Strong opening leads to a strong trending day in Shriram Transport Finance as
shown in this chart. The breakout moves with strong candles / momentum — often the signal of

a profitable trade ahead.

The Concept of Morning Range and How to Trade it

Another parameter that can provide clues about the kind of day ahead is the
morning range. Morning range is defined as the range between the high and
the low levels of the first hour after the market opens.

The high and low of this range are very important and should be watched
carefully. These levels show the degree of balance between the buyers and
sellers during the initial market moves.

If the morning range is very wide, it may imply that the rest of the day
could probably see the price go back and forth between the two
boundaries of the morning range. Wide ranges are not broken easily.
The responsive participants may remain active within this wide range
for the rest of the day, and thus you may see limited moves back and
forth within the range.
In case the morning range is very narrow, we can expect the price to
break through it in the next few hours and thus lead to an extension of



this range. Narrow ranges have higher chances of being taken out on
either side. It is in narrow morning ranges that active players are
expected to come into the picture and take the price further (see Figures
4.4 and 4.5).

Figure 4.4: This 5-minute chart of Lupin shows a wide range in the morning, namely  1,462
to  71,485, but hardly any significant move thereafter.

Figure 4.5: This 15-minute chart of Siemens shows a narrow range in the early part of the
day. Once the high of the range is taken out, you get a solid trend.



There will be days when the day’s price movement will depend on the
morning range in a big way. Correct interpretation of the morning range,
along with other factors, can give you an accurate assessment about what to
expect during the day.

OceanofPDF.com



The Basics of Pivots

Let us now move on and see how pivots can help us decide our course of
action every trading day.

On the graph of an actively traded instrument, a pivot is a particular
level of price at which the instrument is said to be at an equilibrium
between the buyers and sellers:

A pivot is a neutral zone where the bullish and bearish sentiments of the
players are in balance.
It is also a key junction where the buyers and sellers may battle it out to
decide who shall take the price action further from thereon.
A pivot is also a level from where you can expect a directional move in
the price.

Pivot levels aid us in determining where the current level of bullishness
or bearishness for the day is. Trading activity above the point of
equilibrium, or balance, is expected to be bullish for the day, while activity
below the point of balance is expected to be bearish. These levels are said to
have a sort of pull for the prices because the majority of participants are
expected to react at these levels. And because market players react at these
levels, so the levels turn out to be all the more important, much like a self-
fulfilling prophecy, and can be used as points of decision making.

You may well be thinking it would be great if one knew the levels from
where the price might reverse, where exactly the current trend is ending or a
new trend is beginning, and where exactly this point of decision making is
positioned. Well, the good news is that there are ways and means of
knowing the probable pivot levels with reasonable accuracy. Having these
levels plotted on charts can work exactly the way milestones and signboards
work on highways. They help you navigate through your trade and also
guide you on the road to your price target.



There are multiple kinds of pivots in technical analysis. Broadly, though,
these can be classified into two kinds:

Pivots which are formed purely by price action and swing lows or highs
of prior days; and
Pivots which are found by using some calculations of those price
values.

The latter kind is typically used for gauging the direction in the coming
days. There are again further classifications of pivots using various
formulae. But for our trading system, we will restrict ourselves to floor
pivots.

Floor Pivots
Floor pivots are calculated using the previous day’s closing price and its
highs and lows. There is a set of 7 pivot values that can be placed on charts.
Their values are available in most trading software. The central one is
called the central pivot point or, simply, pivot point. That happens to be our
neutral zone. The three pivot levels falling above the central pivot point are
called resistances and the three pivots below the central pivot point are
called supports.

When calculated based on the previous day’s closing price, and high and
low values, these are all called daily pivots, as that’s what they are. Daily
pivot values will thus change every day.

If pivot values are calculated based on the previous week’s closing, and
high and low values, they would be weekly pivots. Monthly and yearly
pivots can similarly also be calculated.

Table 4.1 shows how the 7 pivot levels — the central pivot or pivot point,
along with 3 resistances and 3 supports — are arranged on the charts.

Table 4.1
7 Pivot Levels Showing Resistance and Supports

■ R3 = 3rd Resistance
■ R2 = 2nd Resistance



■ R1 = 1st Resistance
■ PP = Central Pivot Point
■ S1 = 1st Support
■ S2 = 2nd Support
■ S3 = 3rd Support

Derivation of Pivot Values

As noted above, we use the previous day’s high, low and close values to
calculate pivot levels. These levels become our milestones for the next day,
no matter howsoever turbulent the day is.

The previous day’s high and low show its most bullish and bearish levels.
The closing value reflects the final outcome, or the directional bias, for the
forthcoming day as perceived by the participants. Similarly, if we use the
closing, the high and the low of the previous week, or the previous month,
we get the weekly and monthly pivots for the upcoming week and month,
respectively.

Let’s now take a look at the formulae (see Table 4.2) which give us all
the seven levels for the next day. You can use either of the closing price or
the settlement price. Both should work well. You can observe that the
central pivot is nothing but the average of the previous day’s high, low and
close values.

Table 4.2
Formulae for Calculating the Pivot Levels

■ Central Pivot Point (PP) = (High + Low + Close) ÷ 3
■ R1 = (2 * Pivot) – Low
■ R2 = Pivot + (High – Low)
■ R3 = R1 + (High – Low)
■ S1 = (2 * Pivot) – High
■ S2 = Pivot – (High – Low)
■ S3 = S1 – (High – Low)

Interpretation of Pivots

Pivots should be studied in two parts. One part is the intraday pivot levels
which we mentioned above, and which should be placed onto your intraday



charts every morning. You should watch these closely during market hours.
The calculation part can be done either by your software or even by using
an Excel sheet. The interpretation is what matters here.

The day’s trading activity is expected to hover around, and also gravitate
towards, the central pivot point. Any movement in price action above this
point will initially approach the first resistance (R1), while any move below
this point will first approach the first support (S1). The area above the pivot
is basically a bullish price action area, while the area below it is considered
as a bearish area. The price behaviour is to be critically observed as it
moves to either of these areas.

Any rejection of the higher levels above the pivot, or lower levels below
the pivot, will result in the price again drifting back towards the central
pivot point. A price move that takes out these levels successfully is taken as
the market’s acceptance of the new value of the instrument and thus
increases the chance of the price moving further in that direction.

Remember reactive and active participants? Any piercing of the levels
above the central pivot point shows increased participation of active buyers.
It shows strong interest from these players and thus a possibility of higher
levels ahead.

Conversely, any penetration of levels below the central pivot would
indicate that the active participants perceive a lower fair value and, thus,
there are chances of the price drifting even lower in the coming hours, or
days, as the case may be.

On the other hand, any rejection of higher or lower levels from any of the
resistances or supports may bring in reactive players and their actions will
nudge the price back towards the equilibrium, namely the central pivot
point.

Thus we can get a directional bias for the day when we look at the price
behaviour in relation to the daily pivot levels on the charts. Further, the kind
of participants the price moves indicate will give an idea of the extent of
move that we can expect. Similarly, when we look at price action along
with the weekly pivots, we can get a directional bias for the upcoming few
days or weeks.



You may recall we noted earlier that as the price moves away from the
pivots and range, it draws interest of more and more participants who will
want to get onto the moving train. Once a larger crowd gets drawn in,
higher will be the possibility of the next pivot — whether it be resistance or
support — being taken out.

Let’s understand this with the help of a few examples of intraday charts
with the daily pivots plotted on them (see Figures 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8). Please
note that the charts in all the chapters of this book have many concepts
and price action explained within the charts. It is therefore important
that you carefully read the details inset inside the charts as these
highlight the theory and concepts as applied in live markets.

Figure 4.6: Daily pivots on the intraday chart of Pidilite Industries illustrating a bullish day.
The price opens above a pivot, a sign of a bullish day ahead. Note how the pivots look on the

charts.



Figure 4.7: In this chart, Adani Enterprises opens around the pivot, sustains there, and builds
on further from there during the day, taking out each level of resistance, indicating that there’s

more rise to come.

Figure 4.8: This chart of NMDC reveals a fine trading day. The stock hovers around the
central pivot and then builds on further as the day progresses. The chart illustrates how on a
bullish day the price action will stay above the central pivot and move higher, piercing each

level of resistance above.



When the market opens above the previous day’s range, it is possible that
the price may open even above the central pivot, or even above the first
level of resistance (R1). Correspondingly, when the market opens below the
prior range, it may open even below the central pivot, or even below the
first level of support (S1). This is a possibility though it may not always
bear out. But if the price level is breaking away from the range as well as
from the pivot, then the significance of the break immediately multiplies.
Accordingly, we can expect more dramatic action and a more magnified
move ahead, as illustrated in Figure 4.9.

Figure 4.9: Maruti opens above the pivot and soon thereafter it crosses above the previous
day’s high and range as well. The stock takes out each level of overhead resistance with such

ease; all clear signs of a bullish day, right from the day’s start.

If the price breaks the range of several days instead of just one, then the
break’s significance multiplies even further. Such a move shows that the
bottled up energy of multiple days is getting freed, and that can lead to an
extremely powerful march ahead.



In all the four charts from Figures 4.6 to 4.9, the market opens above or
around the central pivot. Later, when it moves higher, and the size of the
move becomes more and more significant, that’s when you know that there
are active participants at play. You can then expect a large move day.

The chart in Figure 4.10 shows a bearish start to the day for Hindalco.
You can see the price opening and staying below the central pivot right
from the beginning of the day. That signals weakness for the given day.
Sure enough, the price soon starts falling further.

Figure 4. 10: Daily pivots on intraday chart of Hindalco illustrating the price action on a
bearish day. The opening price itself indicates bearish sentiment for the day. Once the range of
the previous day breaks down, the active participants come to play and drive the stock lower
with gusto. The stock had opened around  185 and had touched sub  180 levels by mid-day.

The chart of L&T in Figure 4.11 shows another day of bearish price
action.



Figure 4.11: L&T’s intraday chart showing daily pivots. Any rejection of upper side pivots
(resistances) will lead to price falling, or coming into equilibrium, or moving towards the

central neutral pivot.

Role Reversals of Pivots
Once crossed, the daily pivot levels have a tendency of reversing roles.
Thus, a broken support will then work as a resistance during retracements
on the upside. Conversely, any resistance which is taken out will turn into
support during pull-backs.

In effect, pivot levels are nothing but supports and resistances, which
is why once broken they also reverse their roles. When a support is
broken on the way down, it reverses itself into a resistance, and thus any
subsequent upward move can get capped by it. This increases the possibility
that the retracements may remain limited (see Figures 4.12, 4.13 and 4.14).



Figure 4.12: This chart of Dilip Buildcon shows how roles get reversed when pivots get taken
out. Both R1 and R2 turn into supports during subsequent retracements.

Figure 4.13: Havells opens below the centred pivot, tries to rise towards the central pivot, but
fails. It breaks supports S1 and S2. Rejection of the central pivot leads to lower levels, and

broken supports turn resistances.



Figure 4.14: This chart of SAIL shows how the roles of the pivots reverse, once they are taken
out. There is also a catalyst for this move. Now you might be wondering about what this

catalyst is. Just go on reading the chapters ahead, and you’ll discover more and more trading
tactics and insights that we are here to share.

Analysing Market Opening Using Pivots
Once the market opens, say above the pivot point or above the first
resistance R1 depending on the overall market tone and the stock story —
we will cover this in greater detail further on in the book — the trader can
look for the first probable pull-back towards the central pivot. If the price
heads that way from above and finds support there, or even at R1, there is
then a good chance of an uptrend day and you can expect closing levels of
R2, R3, or even higher.

Correspondingly, if the stock opens either below the pivot, or below S1,
and again also depending on the stock story and the overall market trend,
you can wait for a pull-back from below either to the pivot point or to S1.
Each of these levels should act as a resistance now and one can sell from
there with an expectation to see S2, S3, or even lower levels.



In case the price doesn’t pull back towards the support, the resistance or
the central pivot point, and instead proceeds directly further up or down
from where it started, and in the direction in which it started, then you can
consider the price action to be even stronger.

Sometimes the price may not correct but instead may move sideways for
a while before proceeding further. That’s an equally good sign that there’s
more steam left in the same direction. In the case of an uptrend, it means
that all the selling is getting absorbed by fresh buying. In a downtrend this
shows that any new buying activity is failing to lift the price higher due to
additional selling pressure flowing in.

Sometimes the retracements may find support, or resistance as the case
may be, at the high / low of the previous day’s range instead of at R1 or at
the central pivot. The previous day’s closing can act either as a strong
support or a strong resistance depending on the direction of the trend. The
highs and lows of the previous day / week, or even swing highs or lows, can
also form an important support / resistance to watch. Often, trend
resumptions occur from these levels. All of these are variations to be
observed while you try to read the market opening and try to confirm the
directional bias for the day. You should commit yourself to a trade only
after the view, derived from your pre-market analysis gets confirmed during
market hours. The validity of each of these levels will be largely dependent
on the extent of move that occurred before prices approached these levels.
When markets are already over-stretched, and the move is already over-
extended, these levels will provide a stronger halt.

Let us take a look at the day’s price action in Jet Airways through its
intraday chart in Figure 4.15 which also shows the day’s pivots. The price
opens in positive territory above the central pivot, retraces initially but soon
finds support at the previous day’s closing level, which happens to appear
even before the pivot, and builds on the gains from thereon. Any move
above the pivot signifies bullishness.



Figure 4.15: Jet Airways takes off early enough in the day for a solid day trade. (Do read the
detailed insights and observations contained inside the chart). The opening price is above the
central pivot, which signifies bullish sentiment. The breakout above the previous day’s range
again signifies strength of the positive sentiment and the force of the active participants. The

limited retracement that follows finds support even before the pivot, right at the previous close
to be precise, showing the participants’ determination to break free from the previous range.

This leads on to a rocketing move during the day.

Chart 4.16 is another example of the price finding support at the previous
close above the central pivot.



Figure 4.16: In this chart of Future Consumer, trade can be taken on retracement. Note how
the price found support at the previous close which was above the pivot.

We have been using pivots for many years and have often been amazed
at how well they work. As you unravel the magic of pivots, you will
perfect the various ways of using them in different kinds of markets. This is
one weapon that should definitely be a part of your trading arsenal. Pivots
are based on simple calculations. They are also simple to understand, and
easy to use. In short, as we often say colloquially, pivots are: kifayati, tikau
and bharose-mand (economical, sturdy and dependable).

Now let’s dig deeper into pivots and see what more these magical levels
can do for us.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 5

OceanofPDF.com



Trading Pivots — Part II

The Central Pivot Range

The Central Pivot Range
We learnt in Chapter 4 that the daily pivot levels — namely the central line
plus the three resistances and three supports — should be placed onto your
intraday charts every morning. These levels are calculated from the
previous day’s values. These are the levels that you must focus on during
market hours.

Extending our understanding of pivots, we'll now consider an expanded
version of the central pivot line. For that, we add two more levels around
this central pivot line and we call them the upper boundary line and the
lower boundary line, respectively. The two boundaries and the middle
line together form the central pivot range (CPR). Thus, we now have 3
central pivot lines forming the central pivot range (CPR), the 3 resistances
above CPR, and 3 supports below CPR (see Table 5.1).

Table 5.1
Constituents of the Central Pivot Range (CPR)

Central Pivot Line (CPL) = (High + Low + Close) ÷ 3
Lower Boundary (LB) = (High + Low) ÷ 2
Upper Boundary (UB) = (Central Pivot Line – LB) + Central Pivot Line

The CPR is very crucial in your pre-market analysis and preparation, as
well as during live market hours. When preparing for the day ahead, you
should focus on the CPR of the upcoming day, in conjunction with the CPR
of several previous days. This will give you the context whether the pivots
are progressively higher or lower, and whether the pivot width is narrowing
or widening over a number of days.



In short, such a review helps you to assess the left side on the chart,
before trading the chart’s right side. It is very crucial for traders to learn to
do this.

There can be days when the value of the CPR’s lower boundary may turn
out to be greater than that of the upper boundary. So long as your computer
software is doing all the calculations and plotting the boundaries for you,
there is nothing to worry. If you are doing it yourself, just remember that in
such a case the higher value should be plotted as the top boundary line and
the lower value as the bottom boundary line. There is no need for us to get
into further details of the mathematics involved. Now, let’s have a look at
how the pivot levels will appear with the added CPR (see Figure 5.1).

Figure 5. 1: This is how the placement of all the pivot lines together will look.

Let’s try to understand the significance of CPR. Well, there are very
useful signals that can be derived by studying pivots in this way, especially



when we place these levels for multiple days on the charts. There are a few
software that enable this. We suggest using Amibroker platform as it allows
you to customise your study. The next few charts are made in Amibroker
using the above formulae for pivot calculations.

Let’s look at the chart in Figure 5.2 which has the CPR and the first two
levels of resistance and support of multiple days plotted on it. The blue
dotted lines show the CPR, the red lines are R1 and S1, and the purple lines
are R2 and S2. You must get yourself well-versed with such charts. It can
make a big difference in your pre-market preparation and can give you an
undeniable trading edge.

When you view the levels of multiple previous days together, as in
Figure 5.2, you can get a very distinct view about what has been happening
in the recent past, and what could be expected ahead even before the market
opens. This view, combined with the intraday chart showing the floor pivots
for the given day, will make many things clear.

Figure 5.2: The 3 blue lines in the centre indicate the CPR. The red lines show R1 and S1 and
the purple lines are R2 and S2.

Relationship between CPRs of Various Days



Each day’s CPR has a specific relationship with the next day’s CPR.
Depending on the placement of the CPR over multiple days, as well as the
CPR width, we can derive a lot of useful information about the upcoming
day. Let us take each point, one by one.

CPR Width

We know that the CPR levels are calculated from the previous day’s high,
low and close values. If the previous day was a narrow range day, then the
levels will be closer together and thus its CPR will be tighter in comparison
to the CPR for wide range days. Wide range days, naturally, will lead to
wider pivots in the upcoming days, and thus a wider CPR as well. Now, as
you can perhaps guess what we are interested in is abnormal behaviour.

Anything other than normal, whether it be the candle size or the pivot
width, always has some hidden message in it. If you can read those hidden
messages, then you have got yourself an edge in the market. Unusually
narrow CPR over multiple days, for example, indicates a coiling-up of the
market and tells us that we should prepare for a major breakout, or
breakdown, in the near future. Such moves often start with a gap in the
morning, and if the move is accompanied by a favourable larger picture
then you are in for a big day. Sometimes pure price action doesn't show
such tight consolidation in a very clear way. It is especially at such times
that the CPR provides that extra clarity and pin-points emerging
opportunities.

As CPR can be calculated even before the market opening, that indeed is
an advantage. It helps you in multiple ways:

You can decide your position sizing for such days, as well as estimate
targets.
You can allow yourself more leeway in terms of stop losses as well,
based, of course, on your trading style.
On days when you see an abnormally wide pivot range in comparison to
earlier days, you know that it was a big move day. That being the case,
you can reasonably expect range trading for the upcoming day. You can



trade accordingly with appropriate stop losses, targets and methods that
will suit trading a ranged market.
When you are expecting a big trending day, you can be alert and stay
prepared to encash any major moves that you foresee.

Have a look at the CPRs of multiple days plotted on the chart in Figure
5.3. Here, again, the 3 blue lines show the CPR over multiple days. The
purple lines above and below the candles show the R2 and S2 levels of each
of the multiple days. The red lines show the levels of R1 and S1 on each of
the multiple days.

Figure 5.3: Observe how the narrow CPR on the first two days of March leads to a breakout
on the morning of 3 March. The next day’s pivot range is also narrow and the move continues.

A wide CPR on 7 March leads to a trading range day where the price keeps gravitating towards
the CPR.

Figures 5.4 to 5.6 show further examples of the impact of CPR width on
upcoming price moves.



Figure 5.4: Narrow range days. Look how a narrow pivot range over three days leads to a
breakdown even below S2 (purple line).

Figure 5.5: You can see in this example of Century Textiles how narrow pivots lead to
trending days, and wider ones with wider CPR lead to sideways moves. Notice also how the

price keeps gyrating towards the central pivot on ranging days.



Figure 5.6: Consider this Reliance chart. On Day 2, the CPR and other pivots are wide, and
the price gyrates towards the pivot. On Day 1, the narrow pivots led to a breakout from all

levels. In fact, on this day Reliance even took the Nifty higher. It single-handedly contributed
100% to the market’s rise that day.

One must keep in mind that big moves often begin with an opening gap.
The move can then either build further from the gap, or give a minor
retracement and then move on from a support / resistance. So, you should
be comfortable trading both these types of situations. Let’s consider the
price movement of SAIL in Figure 5.7 and Asian Paints in Figure 5.8.



Figure 5.7: The narrow CPR of the previous days, combined with a gap up opening, leads to
a strong trending day for SAIL. The price loiters around the opening, and then moves further

up.

Figure 5.8: This chart of Asian Paints shows a narrow CPR followed by a gap down opening
below the pivot. The price made an effort to rise after an initial gap down but failed at S1 level;

the stock then moved lower.



Sometimes a corrective move during an uptrend can go below the central
pivot line. But so long as it sustains above the lower end of the CPR, the
uptrend is considered strong enough and you can expect the price to move
higher, as exhibited in the charts in Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.10.

During a downtrend, corrective moves that pierce the central pivot line
but maintain or respect the upper end of the CPR indicate that the
downtrend has more steam left. This point is highlighted in Figure 5.9 and
Figure 5.10.

Figure 5.9: This chart shows that barring a minor breakdown the corrective down move in
ICICI Bank stopped at the lower end of the CPR. These lower prices were immediately rejected

as can be see by the rejection candle, and the stock then rose in a big way. The subsequent
correction sustains well above the central pivot line.



Figure 5.10: In this chart of Hindalco, the mid-day correction stays around the lower end of
the CPR. Any further fall below it sees rejection. The uptrend continues nicely after that.

On the days when the pivot width, namely the distance between the three
lines of CPR, doesn't give any clear signal, what we have learnt about the
morning range, or the opening range that we have learnt about in Chapter 4,
can do the trick for us.

Trend Analysis with CPR
Another use of the central pivot range over multiple days is in analysing
trends. Here is how:

So long as a given index or scrip is in a clear uptrend, the price will not
close below the CPR and / or below S1.
An uptrend will always have a rising CPR.
In an uptrend, the CPR acts as a support.
A closing above the day’s CPR tells you that you can have a bullish bias
for the next day.



Thus, if the market has been falling for the last few days and then one
day it closes above the CPR, you can at least expect a sideways market, or
even a reversal from down to up in the coming days.

Correspondingly, in a downtrend:

In a clear downtrend, the price won't close above the CPR and / or
above R1.
A downtrend will always have a falling pivot range.
In a downtrend, CPR acts as a resistance.

Price closing below the CPR indicates that the next day could be bearish.
Thus, if the price starts closing below the CPR after rising for many days,
you can expect either a sideways market or an outright reversal the next
day. You can wait to see whether the market is confirming your view or not
by the action it exhibits the next morning.

In this manner when you observe the CPR over multiple days on a chart,
you can form a better understanding of the current trend. Let us now see
how the price sustains above the CPR over multiple days when the trend is
clearly up — and below the CPR in a downtrend — with the help of
examples in Figures 5.11 to 5.14.

The charts in Figures 5.10 to 5.14 which we have used in exploring CPR
were created using Amibroker software, and thus may look a little different
than most other charts in the book since those are created using another
software. Doing the right kind of analysis takes effort and may require
multiple kinds of setups, tools, techniques and equipment. While we have
tried to keep it as simple as possible, you cannot play test cricket with a
plastic bat, can you? So having the required software, tools and skills is
vitally important.



Figure 5.11: Have a look at this chart of Century Textile. In a clear downtrend, the price stays
below the CPR. When it tries to rise, the CPR acts as a resistance. Also note the price never

goes above R1 in any case. The day when the CPR starts providing support and reverses roles,
the trend reverses too. In the subsequent uptrend, the price stays and closes above the CPR.

Figure 5.12: This is the chart of Tata Motors between 17 March and 23 March 2017. Note
how the CPR acts as resistance in the downtrend. The day the CPR is pierced, the trend also

reverses.



Figure 5.13: In this chart you can see how the price closing above the CPR is the noim in an
uptrend. The price stays above the CPR for multiple days in a row, and the trend remains in

play. When the CPR is broken, the trend reverses, and the price begins to close below it.

Figure 5.14: The price remains below R1 during the downtrend for several days in this Tech
Mahindra chart. There is one day in between where you can see a sharp effort at recovery. The
next three days thereafter continue to be down days and the price stays below R1 (see the top

red line). And below the CPR, the price shows a strong downtrend.



Assessing the Day Ahead
We have now learnt about pivots, including pivot width. We have also
learnt about trending markets and trading markets, and the differences
between the two. We know what and how much to expect in each of the
scenarios. We have studied the importance of the various types of market
openings. What we will now do is create a unified table of all these
parameters combined together which will help us assess the kind of day that
we are likely to see ahead of us. This would give us an edge, keep us alert
to the kind of opportunity that lies ahead, and give us an appropriate signal
whenever there is a chance of a big day coming. Traders can use this table
every morning and thus bring to their trading day an actionable market view
derived from it. This will save you from taking random trades or decisions
based on emotion.

Table 5.2 is specifically created keeping Nifty Bank in view. At the time
of writing, the value of Nifty Bank was around 20,000 in the cash segment.
You can create and maintain a similar table for any other indices or stocks
of your choice.

Table 5.2
Mapping the Trading Day Ahead

Trend Opening Pivot Action to be taken
width

Strong Greater than 130 points Narrow Buy on dip/sell on rise
Strong Greater than 130 points Wide Buy on dip/sell on rise
Strong Around 30 to 40 points Wide Buy on dip/sell on rise
Strong Near the pivot Wide No trade zone
Sideways Near the pivot Narrow No trade zone
Sideways Above previous Narrow No trade zone

high/low
Sideways Above previous Wide Act against previous day’s

high/low action/move

In earlier chapters we saw many charts showing clear trending days. Now
let’s consider the chart of Nifty in Figure 5.15 which shows a notrade day
for 7 April 2017. By then, the markets had already turned sideways after
multiple trend days in a row. On 7 April, the opening was not great, pivots



were also quite close and the CPR narrow, making it a no-trade day for the
index. Were Nifty to break down below S1 and / or the previous low, we
might have considered an intraday short because the price action remained
below the pivot all the time. We will learn more about this in Chapter 8
which deals with when and how to swing sideways. For now, Nifty’s chart
in Figure 5.15 is a no-trade day; contrast thus with L&T’s chart in Figure
5.16 which signals a big day ahead.

Figure 5.15: No trade day as Nifty stays within the previous day’s range.



Figure 5.16: This chart of L&T of 3 April 2017 shows multiple factors that signalled a big day
ahead. There’s a range breakout after several days of narrow range. Such moves have the

probability of sustaining for many coming days.

The next chart in Figure 5.17 again shows the same move in the same
scrip as the chart in Figure 5.16, namely L&T, on the same day. In this chart
from Amibroker, you can see that the pivot range, or CPR, on 3 April was
above the CPR of previous many days. This happens when a stock begins to
move in a strong and clear uptrend. As we've learnt earlier, so long as the
stock remains above the CPR, or even above S1, the trend remains up and
the CPR will keep rising higher each day. This particular trend had begun
just on the previous day when the price moved above the high of many
weeks. The pivots also started to rise simultaneously. When the market
opens the next day, the new CPR will again be higher than the CPR shown
here for 3 April in Figure 5.17.



Figure 5.17: Amibroker chart of L&T — the price builds a clear uptrend as the day’s CPR
was above the CPR levels of many previous days.

Importance of the Context

While doing your analysis, you should keep an eye on the context. You will
be able to see the context when you take into consideration all the market
action over the previous many days. It is vital that you equip yourself with
both the required skills as well as tools if you are really serious about
trading. You should be fully aware of all the important turning points on
your chart, be these floor pivots, or even swing pivots, or the crucial levels
of support and resistance. Once you have done your pre-market analysis
using CPR, you can better anticipate the upcoming day’s action and check if
your bias is being confirmed or rejected on your intraday chart by
considering the daily pivots. You should then trade the day accordingly.

There is one thing that should be especially taken note of. Despite a
correction if the stock sustains S1, the uptrend should be considered intact.
This point remains valid provided it happens only once or twice. If the price
starts criss-crossing the pivots every now and then, you are probably in a
sideways market and the scrip under consideration is no more trending.



Contrary behaviour and boundary crossing can be tolerated to some extent,
but there must be limits, as in life, so too in the markets.

Advantages of Pivots
Once you start using pivots you will understand how much of a
chaoscutting tool they are. Even on the most volatile of days, pivots can
throw light on what to expect next from a particular price level on a
particular chart. The greater the liquidity in a particular instrument, the
better will be the effectiveness of these pivots. Which is why including
pivots in your trading system gives you a fair idea about what to expect the
next day even before the market opens. Also, since these levels are based on
pure price action, they give indications much earlier compared to signals
coming from some of the lagging indicators. These points are well
illustrated by real market examples in Figures 5.18, 5.19 and 5.20.

Figure 5.18: You can see how pivot signals are generated much earlier compared to those
from lagging indicators on this 5-minute chart of Adani Power. Remember, a few minutes can
mean a lot to a day trader. Sometimes the trade may even end within a few minutes, and you

could be done for the day!



Figure 5.19: Look how prompt the pivots are in spotting entries on this Dish TV chart. Pivots
signal entry at 10:54 A.M. while the MACD signal comes in only at around 12 noon.

Figure 5.20: This Hindalco chart bears out the same point. Look how the inability to take out
R1 could have warned you in a timely manner, signalling that the price would likely drift

towards the equilibrium.



Multi Time Frame Analysis with Pivots

Another important thing to remember is that in case you see a particular
daily pivot, say S1, lying close to a weekly support pivot, then that
particular level becomes all the more important as a support level on the
price chart. Accordingly, if such a level is taken down it may signify a much
bigger price correction in the coming days. In other words, the confluence
of levels on various time frames reinforces the relevance of the levels,
signifying larger moves in both cases — namely, whether they are
successfully retested or whether they are broken. This helps us in multi time
frame analysis and understanding of price behaviour for the stock under
study over a longer horizon.

So it makes sense checking the weekly pivot levels as well once in a
week. Also, weekly pivots work as wonderfully on intraday charts as do the
daily pivots. Let’s see an example of how a weekly pivot would look and
work as plotted on daily charts. In the example of SRF’s daily chart in
Figure 5.21, the stock had seen a decent rise prior to its quarterly results but
the results failed to keep pace with expectations. As you can see in the
chart, the stock opens below the weekly pivot level of  1,724 post the
results and falls from levels of  1,710 to  1,550 on the very same day.
That’s the impact of higher time frame pivots being broken.

Figure 5.21: SRF daily chart with weekly pivots plotted. The price opened below the pivot
leading to a big downtrend day.



The example of L&T in Figure 5.22, again illustrates the importance of
weekly pivots, in this case showing how the price rises from above them.

Figure 5.22: L&T stays above the weekly pivot and then makes multi-month highs. This is
the daily chart showing weekly pivots.

A Practical Caveat

Markets are full of noise and do not operate in perfect text book manner in
real life. Traders should be flexible and able to weave according to the
twists and turns of the highly volatile real time environs. Accordingly, do
not expect the price to open exactly at a pivot point on a bullish day. It may
well open a few points above or below it and still give us a good bullish or
bearish day, respectively, with multiple entry opportunities. Remember our
comparison of trading with dancing on a revolving floor? Yes, that’s how
agile and nimble you have to be as a trader. These levels operate more like
zones and not exact points, and as traders we have to learn to love volatility.
Or, at least learn to live with it.



We have already seen that during an uptrend the price action would
remain above S1 on each given day, and for multiple days together.
Correspondingly, during a downtrend, the price action remains below R1 on
each day for many days together. The same theory applies to the intraday
charts that you will be trading with. So, the right way to interpret pivots is
to give the stocks some leeway to play out the intraday retracements and the
opening ticks. We will, therefore not write-off a stock that opens below the
daily pivot or below the CPR, provided the price stays above the first
support, S1. We will give it some benefit of doubt and consider it for a buy
when it tries to move higher. Remember, it is only an intraday dip and not a
close below these crucial levels. So we can afford to be a little
accommodating here. This should be done keeping in view the other
multiple factors affecting the stock behaviour for the day. As we progress
with each chapter, we will learn further nuances in the case of all of these
factors.

Once the price moves up from S1, or from anywhere between the central
pivot and S1, we can look for higher levels towards R1 and R2, or even
higher. Correspondingly, in a down trending market if the stock opens
above either the pivot or above the CPR, or even between the CPR and R1,
you can get a better sell entry depending on the larger picture. As we
Indians often say about various matters in life, Thoda sa idhar udhar adjust
karo, bhai (Brother, life is not a perfect fit; we need to adjust a bit here and
there). In sum:

An uptrending stock can remain in our buy list for the day even if it
opens a little lower than the daily pivot, so long as the price sustains
above S1, finds support around it, and shows signs of moving higher.
Correspondingly, a stock in a downtrend that opens higher on a given
day continues to remain in the sell list provided it doesn't go above R1,
and resumes its fall. You can see an example of this in Figure 5.23.



Figure 5.23: In a downtrend, PNB continues in our sell list as it does not go above R1 despite
opening higher.

Milestones Covered

In the two chapters on pivots, namely Chapter 4 and Chapter 5, we have
learnt about:

Morning range;
Types of market opening styles; and
Details of floor pivots, including the central pivot range (CPR), the
central pivot line, the six levels of support and resistance, pivot width,
role reversal by pivots, multi time frame analysis, and trend analysis
with pivots.

It is the simultaneous use of past information and price behaviour, plus
the current day’s market sentiment, that helps us more accurately estimate a
particular move during the day. A successful trader has to keep both these
perspectives in mind when entering a trade. That is how you keep the
context in view.



Your pre-market preparation will provide you with the broader picture
when you study the development and placement of pivots over multiple
days of the recent past. It is the study of the CPR over multiple prior days,
combined with the early morning opening tick in the market, the morning
range of the current day, the opening style, as well as the daily pivots on
your intraday charts that will have a huge impact on the day’s directional
bias. Depending on that, you will know whether you should expect a major
move or trade with a smaller target.

It is nobody’s claim, however, that pivots are some unfailing holy grail. It
would be naïve to think that the market moves can be captured or
manipulated using any single technique. All that we are saying is that pivots
definitely help a day trader in narrowing down his focus while trying to
gauge the direction for the day. As you will discover in the following
chapters there are many more things that we will combine with pivots. The
lovely pieces of music or songs that we often hear in music albums or
movies are hardly ever created using a single instrument. It is always an
orchestra of multiple musical instruments that get together to create heart
pumping or foot thumping rhythms. In the same way, it’s the confluence or
the synergy of many aspects which work magic in the markets. And that’s
the magic we shall unravel by the end of the book.

So, on to other factors that we can add to our daily arsenal.

"Looking at any single factor in isolation is short sightedness; an entire orchestra needs to
be put together to create a symphony."

— Ashwani Gujral

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 6

OceanofPDF.com



Trading Trending Markets — Part I

Trade Entry Tactics and Stop Losses

Introduction

A man in a hot air balloon realised that he was lost. Looking down, he saw
a man below. “Excuse me, but can you help me? I promised a friend an
hour ago that I would meet him soon, but I don’t know where I am,” he
said.

The man below replied, “You are in a hot air balloon hovering
approximately 30 feet above the ground. You are between 40 and 41 degrees
North latitude and between 56 and 57 degrees West longitude.”

To which the balloonist replied: “You must be a broker.”
To which the man on the ground said: “Yes I am, but how did you know?

”
The balloonist: “Everything you told me is technically correct but I have

no idea what to make of your information and, the fact is, I’m still lost.
Frankly, you’ve not been much help so far.”

The man below responded: “You must be a trader.”
To which the balloonist replied: “Yes, I am, but how did you know?”
To which the man on the ground said: “You don’t know where you are or

where you are going. You have risen to your current position due to a large
quantity of hot air. You made a promise which you have no idea how to keep
and you expect me to solve your problem. The fact is, you are in exactly the
same position that you were in before we met but, now, somehow it’s my
fault.”



Yes, indeed, many traders are exactly like the one depicted in the story
above.

Without having your own tools, knowledge and analysis, no amount of
borrowed “sure-shots” can suffice. You cannot take the steering wheel of a
racing-car and keep WhatsApping others to ask what is to be done next.
That’s not how consistent money is made. Come to think of it, every trader
does make money. The difference is that some do it for themselves, while
others do so for their brokers. Well, we don’t want to behave like the
balloonist trader. So let’s chart our own path by learning some more skills.
After all, it is your money and you want to grow it. So, be the pilot, not just
a passenger in your financial journey.

In this chapter we will learn about entering trades in trending markets:

We will start with the various time frames to be used during analysis as
well as in live markets.
We will check out how the entire trade setup should be laid out.
We will describe four tactics for entering a trade in trending markets.
Plus, we will look at three methods of trailing the stop loss once the
trade is in decent profits. We will also understand the circumstances
under which trailing stop loss techniques should be used.

How to Select Stocks to Trade Using Different
Time Frame Charts

We have come to the arena to win! A warrior never enters the battlefield without enough
preparation.

A disciplined day trader is expected to do his homework regularly and in
detail. His pre-market chart analysis should cover the study of technicals on
various time frames. Though his time horizon for actual trading may span
from 9:15 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., he must be fully aware of what is happening in
higher time frames as well. Yes, that will take some time and effort every
day but if you refuse to pay in terms of effort and time, you will end up



paying in money terms. If you think that reading or learning from
successful professionals is costly, by all means try ignorance.

Your analysis should begin with a study of the daily charts. The daily
charts will give you the idea about the current bias of market participants. It
will tell you whether the sentiment in the stock you’re looking at is bullish
or bearish. As you start studying daily charts regularly, you will realise that
certain ripe trade setups that appear on daily charts can give big moves in
the morning, or within the next few days. Keeping such stocks on your
watch-list can alert you to the upcoming opportunity.

What’s more, moves that originate from higher time frame charts can
even go on for multiple days. Even if you do not intend to carry positions
home as a day trader, you can take daily entries and exits at appropriate
times. A newly started trend having strong momentum behind it will make
your life easier as it sustains for a few days. If there is no immediate
obstacle in the path, it can provide you with multiple opportunities of entry
and exit. If you are lucky, you may also get an intraday move worth many
days of smaller moves. For example, the daily chart of Indiabulls Housing
Finance in Figure 6.1 clearly brings out the possibility of a solid trade
owing to a ripe setup. The stock opened at  865 with a gap, and continued
higher during the day till  930.

Figure 6.1: High probability trade: this daily chart of Indiabulls Housing Finance shows a
solid trade setup and a possible good move as the price and 20MA line were rising above the



200MA line, and it was also breaking out above a multiday range. Big moves can be found
when you focus on all time frames simultaneously.

Figure 6.2: Dredging Corporation rises more than 50% in 3 days — from  478 to above 
650 — on a multi-year breakout. Its daily chart shows price levels from 2014 to 2017.

Figure 6.3: This intraday chart of Indiabulls Housing Finance stock lives up to the
expectations built on the basis of pre-market preparation. The preceding narrow range over
multiple days, and the price above relevant MAs raised expectations of a coming big move.

Every contraction is followed by an expansion; the stock’s charts of higher time frames
suggested an upward breakout from the range.



Do also look at the examples of Dredging Corporation in Figure 6.2 and
Indiabulls Housing Finance in Figure 6.3.

It is also useful to review the weekly and monthly charts once a week and
once a month, respectively. New patterns as well as changes in the patterns
on these charts are not going to appear or disappear very frequently. When
they do, however, they can foretell the comparatively bigger move that can
be expected in a stock.

Always remember, higher the number of factors in your favour, the easier
and smoother will be your ride, and the quicker you shall rise.

Intraday Chart for Further Confirmation

Once you have short-listed your best stocks for the upcoming day’s trade on
the basis of daily charts, you can dig deeper by having a look at their hourly
and / or 15-minute charts. No matter how accurate your reading of trend or
sentiment from the daily chart is, unless the intraday move is aligned in the
same direction you will not become profitable (see intraday chart of
Indiabulls Housing Finance in Figure 6.3). As a day trader, your stop losses
are comparatively tighter and it is important that you come into profits
soon. The best of moves appear when a given trend aligns in multiple
time frames. The idea is to be on the right side of the trend, and
preferably at the earliest possible entry.

Trade Setup

We will be using all the three tools for our trade setups, namely:

1. Pivot levels;
2. Moving averages; and
3. Candlestick patterns.

We have already learnt how to read, interpret and use all these three
tools. In real time trading during market hours, we will look at all three of



them together, and try to derive trading signals that emerge from their
combined impact.

Also, as discussed earlier we will be using the 20MA, the 50MA and the
200MA lines in our trading. The 20MA will be used as the main MA line.

We will look for buy entries whenever the price rises above the
20MA line, or is moving towards it from lower levels. If the price has
crossed above the moving average from below it, we will observe if the
MA line is providing support during subsequent pullbacks or not. Only
then will we accept that a clear trend is emerging.

In a downtrend, the price typically stays below the 20MA line, and this
MA line acts as resistance. If the price has fallen below the 20MA line from
above, we will wait and observe if the MA line is capping any subsequent
rise. If so, we will look for short entries. Short entries are also possible
when a given stock moves towards the MA line from a level which is way
above it.

The best of trending moves will have all the three moving averages lined
either up, or down, as the case may be, in favour of the move. At such
times, because the trend is clear and strong, the pivots too will work very
well. Strong uptrends will find support at the 20MA line during
retracements. In case of stronger pull-backs or corrections, support can
emerge around 50MA or 200MA lines. In a strong downtrend, the 20MA
line will stop the rise. In case of stronger pull-back rallies, 50MA or 200MA
line will halt the rise.

The best uptrends will have the 200MA line below the 20MA line. The
best of the downtrends will have the 200MA line lying above the 20MA
line. An overhead 200MA line can act as a resistance whenever the price
tries to rise higher from below it. Correspondingly, a 200MA line lying
below the price can act as a strong support in cases of price falls or
breakdowns. An intraday trader should keep an eye on the 200MA line in
the 5-minute chart, as well as in the 15-minute and 60-minute charts. The
MA lines and pivots can work very well as important locations from where
we can expect trends to resume post a correction, or as points for the price
to reverse from.



Together, moving averages and pivots will give you a clear idea about
the kind of market you are in. The daily floor pivot levels placed on your
intraday charts will clearly tell you the levels at which you can expect to see
buyers and sellers. The additional significant levels, such as the previous
day’s close, the range boundaries in a ranging market, and the previous
swing highs and swing lows will throw up enough clues so that you can
quickly interpret the data during intraday markets. It is equally crucial to
keep an eye on the weekly and monthly highs and lows because those are
also important levels from the location point of view.

When the right moment arrives, candlesticks will provide the final
signal for pulling the trigger. We have already learnt that candle signals
which appear at the right time, and at high-probability locations or levels
have a higher chance of working out successfully. When momentum in the
market is strong, and is building further, giant candles will appear more
often; while tiny candles will form the majority in ranging markets. We will
keep all these points in mind when choosing our trades each day. Once we
find that most factors are in our favour, we will go all out and make a
killing.

To repeat, we will commit ourselves only when we see a majority of
factors aligned in our favour, and when the path ahead looks clear.
Once we make a commitment, we are at the mercy of the market and there
is nothing we can then do to change its course. So keep a cool mind,
process all available information, analyse your charts, and plan your trades
before making a commitment or taking the plunge.

Four Entry Tactics for a Trending Market
Having well defined entry tactics will help you refrain from jumping into
random trades. Entering into the right trade at the most precise time can
alter the outcome of your trade in a dramatic way, and it can have a huge
bearing on your trading profits.

We will now consider four kinds of entry tactics in a trending market.



1. Entry on Trend Resumption After a Correction Upto a Support or
Resistance

In a clear uptrend, if you see a stock retracing from higher levels you can
consider entering a long trade once the correction is over and as soon as the
trend resumes.

The retracement, or the counter trend move, will force the price lower.
You will therefore see a few bearish candles appearing as the price retraces
down in search of support. We have already learnt that market often
achieves what it wants to in 3, 5 or 8 candles. While this should not be
treated as a hard and fast rule but it is a commonly observed phenomenon
and can work as a useful guideline. Once you see the price reaching an
important level of support, you can expect the retracement to end and the
original trend to resume. This support could be either the floor pivot levels,
or any of the moving averages sloping in the direction of the trend. It could
also be the previous day’s close, which often acts as a support when the
price retraces intraday. If any of these levels do indeed provide support, you
would see the appearance of bullish candles at those levels. Once that
happens, you wait for a confirmation which comes if another candle of the
same colour appears. You can then enter long, above the high of the last
bearish candle. You may see the trend resuming steadily.

The initial stop loss in a long trade should always be placed below the
entry candle, or below the nearest swing low if it is close by, with some
buffer.

In the case of a downtrend, you should look for a retracement that takes
the price higher until it meets with a resistance at one of the pivots, or at an
overhead moving average acting as a resistance. The retracement candles in
a downtrend will be bullish candles. Sometimes it can take a candle or two
more before the trend picks up, the previous low gets taken down and the
downtrend resumes. Let that happen. You should enter short once you see
the appearance of a bearish candle, i.e. once the low of the last green candle
is taken down. You will then see the downtrend resume steadily. You will
learn to deal with these variations as you go on implementing the tactics.

In the case of a short entry, place the initial stop loss above the high of
the entry candle, or above the nearest swing high if it is very close by, with



some added buffer. The examples in Figures 6.4, 6.5, and 6.6 bring out
these points clearly.

Figure 6.4: Entry and stop loss locations after correction in an up- and downtrend,
respectively.

Figure 6.5: This chart of Godrej Properties clearly brings out how and where to enter after a
retracement in an uptrend. The stock opens above the pivot, which is a bullish sign. After an

initial, limited retracement, it resumes its upward move, and makes higher highs from the MA
location.



Figure 6.6: With the entire IT sector under pressure, HCL Tech opens below the pivot. After
an initial retracement, it resumes its fall from the pivot point as location. The short trade entry

is clearly indicated on the chart.

2. Entry After a Minor Pullback Midway in a Strong Trend

A second possibility is that the trending price may not see any sizeable
correction and that at the appearance of the very first bearish candle in an
uptrend, buyers quickly come in and the selling, or the supply, gets
immediately absorbed. The very next candle is then again green and it
smoothly takes out the high of the previous bearish candle — and the trend
continues higher. While this kind of price move will not give you the luxury
to enter lower, it should definitely bolster your confidence about the
strength of the trend. The momentum is said to be strong enough to restrain
the stock from making any deep corrective move. Minor or negligible
retracements can be ignored, and the trend is assumed to continue. The
same thing can happen in a downtrend as well. A single green candle is
immediately met with selling pressure and the trend continues down.



The entry and stop rules in such a case are:

In a downtrend, enter short when the low of the counter trend bullish
candle is broken.
In an uptrend, enter long above the high of the bearish candle.
Placement of the initial stop will remain the same, namely below the
low of the entry bar in an uptrend, and above the high of a bearish bar in
a downtrend.

If the counter trend move is sharp and sudden, then the pullback candle
could be a little bigger. The trend resumption can still happen within one
candle but the stop in such cases will be wider. Again, the entry is suggested
once the high of the red counter trend candle is taken out in an uptrend,
with a stop below the low of the entry candle, or below the recent low. The
converse is true for a downtrend. Have a look at the examples in Figures
6.7, 6.8 and 6.9 which illustrate these points. As always, please do also
carefully read the details written inside the chart boxes which highlight
some key points.

Figure 6.7: Entry points in up- and downtrends after very minor pullbacks. The positions of
stop losses are also shown.



Figure 6.8: A single red candle briefly interrupts the uptrend but the trend is swiftly set right
by the very next solid green candle. Please note how the MA line is acting as support to the

uptrend.

Figure 6.9: The price of Sobha Developers rises higher the entire day, giving only minor pull-
backs for entry. Strong uptrend.



3. Entry upon Trend Resumption after a Sideways Move

Another possibility is that you get to see a sideways move in the price
action. This is often referred to as time correction. The stock is said to be
consolidating, or taking rest, before it makes another big leap in the
direction of the trend. Formation of multiple Lilliput candles is a typical
characteristic of a sideways move. There is no fresh or forceful buying that
can lead to higher prices even if the trend is up. Neither is there any major
sell-off. You will not see lower prices here, but only flat moves for some
time. The range is narrow and the candles are tiny in size. The volume may
also be negligible. The price action which was earlier at a distance from the
MA line, will now drift sideways and will move towards the MA line. At
such times, there is a high probability of another trending move to begin. It
could be either an up move or a down move, depending on the direction of
the earlier trend and the broader context. As we move on, we will consider
the question of context in detail.

Let’s now look at the examples in Figure 6.10, Figure 6.11 and also
Figure 6.12.



Figure 6.10: Entry after a giant green candle signifying breakout from a sideways range.
Note the position of the stop and the supporting MA lines.

Figure 6.11: Entry upon the breakdown of a range in a downtrend, signalled by a big bearish
candle. Note the position of the stop loss and the downward sloping MA lines in the chart.



Figure 6.12: Coal India has a weak day. Breakdowns of midway consolidations in a
downtrend provide entry on the short side.

4. Entry on Trend Resumption Upon the Appearance of a Rejection
Candle at a Crucial Location after a Retracement

Another opportunity to enter a trending move occurs when you see a
rejection candle during a retracement.

Consider the case of a retracement in an uptrending market or stock.
Let’s say this retracement ends at a level of support with a rejection candle.
This is a sign that market participants are not willing to let the price fall any
further. This candle pattern typically gives a high probability trade,
especially when it appears at a crucial support. If it also happens at
important market hours, that’s still better. In such situations you can enter
long at the next candle or after the next few candles when the price takes
out the high of the rejection candle. The initial stop loss will be below the
recent low, or below the entry candle.

Correspondingly, in a falling stock or market a rejection candle having a
long top tail during a retracement is a sign that the counter trend rally is
about to end. If the pattern appears at a level of resistance and / or at an
important market hour, the better and stronger is the cue. Once the low of
this rejection candle is broken, entry should be taken on the short side. The
initial stop loss can be placed above the high of the rejection candle, or
above the recent high. Sometimes if the tail is too long, you can use the
50% rule explained earlier, and place your stop loss accordingly. So long as
50% of that reversal or rejection candle is not given back, we assume that
the trend may go on. Have a look at the examples in Figures 6.13 and 6.14.



Figure 6.13: Entries using rejection candles in both uptrend and downtrend, with initial stop
loss positions.

Figure 6.14: IT is under pressure resulting in weak day for all IT stocks, including Tech
Mahindra shown in this chart. Note the rejection candle sell signal in direction of the

downtrend and entry point, as marked on the chart.

So, there are four entry tactics available at the support levels in an
uptrend, and at resistances in a downtrend. As described above, all four are
capable of leading to trend resumptions in their own ways (see Table 6.1).



More often than not, it is from these candle patterns and locations that the
trend will resume.

Table 6.1
4 Entry Tactics in a Trending Market

■ Entry on trend resumption after a correction up to a support / resistance.
■ Entry after minor pullback midway in a strong trend.
■ Entry on trend resumption after a sideways move.
■ Entry on trend resumption upon the appearance of a rejection candle at an important location

after a retracement.

It is also important to keep the trading hour in mind as you observe these
price patterns.

Sideways moves are very common during mid-day markets.
While a new trending move can also start in the middle of the trading

day, the chance of a final move erupting from narrow ranges made during
mid-day is higher as the market approaches the last trading hours of the day.
The location factor, namely proximity to the MA line, pivots, swing high /
low, etc. act as fuel to ignite the firing move. The best breakouts with the
highest probability of strong follow-throughs will start from around such
important locations. There is also a chance of seeing larger candles here if
the move begins with a bang. We have learnt earlier that the biggest market
moves generally erupt from tiny candles. When they do, you often get to
see giant-sized candles in the eruption stage. Initial stops in the case of both
up- and downtrends should be maintained below / above the recent low /
high of the range and / or below / above the entry candle. Remember to
always add some buffer to the stop loss placement.

Let us now consider a few more real market examples to understand how
these tactics are implemented for entering real-time trades. We will mark
multiple factors from hereon, and it is therefore important to study all the
details given within the charts of Figures 6.15, 6.16, 6.17 and 6.18.



Figure 6.15: Have a look at how a strong uptrend sustains above the moving averages and
provides multiple trade entries during retracements.

Figure 6.16: Observe how the previous highs are soon taken out when retracements occur
with tiny candles, and the uptrend resumes and newer highs are made.



Figure 6.17: The stock falls below the pivot. The 20MA line is below the 50MA line which is
below 200MA line. The price is also soon seen below S1 and S2. Entries shown on the chart

after failed pullbacks and after range breakdown.

Figure 6.18: Rejection candle leads to a strong down move in the chart above



The Initial Stop Loss
We’ve now seen how to take entries into a trend using either a correction, a
minor pull-back, or a sideways consolidation. For all such entries, the best
initial stop loss level would be either below the low of the entry candle in
an uptrend, or above the high of the entry candle in a downtrend. In an
uptrend, if the recent swing low or the range-bottom low is close by, one
can extend the stop loss to accommodate that level. In a downtrend, if the
recent high is nearby the stop loss can be placed in such a way that it stays
above both the entry candle high and the recent high as well. As day traders
we neither want to see any major drawdowns, nor do we want to stay in
trades that go on loitering around aimlessly for very long. A tight initial stop
loss helps achieve these considerations. You may, however, choose to add a
bit of a buffer to your stop value derived from the charts to accommodate
random market noise.

The Trailing Stop Loss

Stay with the stock till the time the stock stays with you. Dump it when it dumps you.

When a trade moves in our favour, we definitely want to ride the entire
move as far as possible. Not that we will ever overstay our welcome but
when the market is in a giving mood, we do not want to keep jumping
wagons either. In other words, we stay with the stock so long the stock stays
with us. It can be for the entire day or, at times, even for the next day
depending on your trading mind-set.

Now, how do we achieve this? We do so by trailing our stop loss. Thus,
we raise our stop loss levels in tandem with the stock moving higher in an
uptrend. If we are in a downtrend, we keep lowering the stop loss in synch
with the falling stock prices. This tactic will ensure that you do not give
back more than a minimal amount of your earned profits in case of a sudden



move against you. It also ensures that you stay with the stock and reap the
maximum returns so long as the stock moves in your favour.

Of course, staying with a move longer also saves commission costs
incurred on frequent entries and exits. The real idea, however, is to make
big bucks when the market is moving favourably.

When to Trail a Stop Loss

If you focus on the top line, namely managing your quality trades, instead of being
enamoured of taking on too many trades, namely overtrading and wagon jumping, the
bottom line of profits will be taken care of automatically.

Before getting into the mechanics of how to trail a stop loss, let’s be clear
about when to do so.

Trailing the stop loss is meant strictly for trending markets, namely
for the expansion phase only. If the range is narrow, if markets are
contracting, and if the momentum is very low, then it is better to be satisfied
with the targets achieved through a fixed initial stop loss. So it is imperative
to keep the larger context in mind, and know what is happening around you,
before deciding on the action plan.

Without understanding the context you may end up using exactly the
right techniques at the exact wrong places. Always check out the environs
before you check-in.

Three Methods of Trailing a Stop Loss

1. The 8MA Line Trailing Stop Loss Technique

We’ve learnt that stock prices remain above the 20MA line in an uptrend
and below it during a downtrend. We have also learnt that shorter time



frame moving averages will wrap around the price more tightly than do
longer time moving averages.

It has been observed that when a trend is strong and the moves are clear,
the candles will remain not just above the 20MA line but also above the
8MA line. This 8MA line will stay closer to the price action and will keep
rising as the price moves higher. When price action stays above the 8MA
line, the momentum is said to be really strong since every pullback will
immediately be absorbed by fresh buyers coming in. Accordingly, all minor
dips will be bought into in such cases and the up move will remain intact
without any major correction.

When you find such a move you are in for very decent profits, especially
if the larger picture and the context are also in your favour. The trend is said
to be at its best so long as the price sustains above this 8MA line. The same
holds true about the trend’s strength so long as the price stays below the
8MA line in a downtrend. Accordingly, we suggest the use of the 8MA line
for trailing your stop. In other words, you continue to hold your position
so long as the candles keep closing above the 8MA line in an uptrend and
below the 8MA line in a downtrend. This MA line does a fantastic job of
keeping you in the trade. So long as the market is in an expansion phase, the
8MA line will let you ride the trend, not just intraday but sometimes even
for two days or even longer.

Conversely, when the downtrend is strong the rallies will get immediately
sold into and the price action will remain below the 8MA line. You can
continue holding your short trades till the price crosses above this line and
kicks you out. This way you stand to gain the maximum without giving
away much from your earned profits. If the move goes on for several days,
you may also get the advantage of opening gaps in your favour. The
examples in Figures 6.19 to 6.21 will help you understand this concept
through real market trades.



Figure 6.19: This chart of MRF Tyres of 15 March 2017 shows a clearly uptrending day with
multiple entry opportunities. Using 8MA line as stop loss would have kept you in the move the

whole day.

Figure 6.20: Hitting the road to growth with JK Tyres — total bull control here in the second
leg of the up move, using 8MA line as the stop loss.



Figure 6.21: Infosys in a downtrend. As you will note, the 8MA line does a fantastic job as a
trailing stop loss tool.

The example in Figure 6.22 exhibits the mighty power of the 8MA line in
acting as a trailing stop loss over several days. While our focus in this book
is on day trading but it is important to appreciate how solid the system is, so
that you have conviction about the technique that you are learning and are
going to use every single day.



Figure 6.22: See how well the 8MA line trailing stop loss technique works in this daily chart
of Yes Bank.

2. Using the Mighty 20MA Line as Trailing Stop Loss

For those who are willing to take bigger risks for bigger returns, we also
suggest the use of the 20MA line as trailing stop loss. The technique
remains the same as in the case of the 8MA line. The difference is that the
trader using the 20MA line may stay with the trend, and therefore in the
trade, for a longer duration. He should also be willing to give back a little
more when the trend ends. There isn’t anything wrong or right with either
of the two MA options. What suits you will depend on your mental makeup.
Later in the book, we will discuss more about the mental make-up for a
trader.

For the present, let’s consider a few examples of how a 20MA line
trailing stop loss will work and look on charts illustrated in the examples in
Figures 6.23, 6.24 and 6.25.



Figure 6.23: As this chart shows, the 20MA line keeps you in the move for two days in a row
as the price of Ceat Tyres trends upward.

Figure 6.24: Asian Paints is reeling under severe pressure in this daily chart. Note the
effectiveness of the 20MA line as a trailing stop loss in a higher time frame.



Figure 6.25: This is a classic example of an entire cycle of price movement. Tata Steel suffered
a sizeable fall in the previous week, which was followed by a sideways pause for a few days,

then came a breakout early morning with a follow-through move. The price moves above the
200MA line from below.

3. Two Steps Forward, One Step Back Trailing Stop Loss

Now we come to the third technique of trailing the stop loss. In this case,
we allow the price to move two candles forward in our favour from the
entry level. We then start trailing the stop loss, once we see two green
candles in an uptrend — or two red candles in a down trend — including
the entry candle.

With every new candle that begins to form from the start of the third
candle onward, we move the stop loss to below the low of the previous
candle. This way we permit only one step back of retracement. We keep
shifting the stop loss with every new candle, until the stop loss takes us out
of the trade.

In a fast moving, momentum-driven final leg of an up or a down move,
you often see big green and red candles, respectively, which move the
prices like there is no looking back. The price seems to jump ahead in big



leaps and quickly crosses many pivots — resistances or supports as the case
may be. We try making a few quick bucks by chasing the momentum

as early as possible. We also intend to exit once our target is met, or as
soon as we see the stock halting or retracing.

Figure 6.26: Two steps forward, one back stop loss trailing method. Points 1, 2, 3 and 4 are
levels where the trailing SL will be placed. You begin doing so as soon as the third candle from

your entry begins.

Such moves begins very rapidly and may even finish in a similar way
within the same day. This technique of trailing stop loss will not only keep
you in the move so long as it sustains, but will also ensure that you do not
overstay your welcome because at all times your stop loss is just one candle
away from the current candle under formation. Figure 6.26 illustrates this
concept, and two real life examples in Figure 6.27 and Figure 6.28 highlight
its working in the market.

Clearly, this technique permits only very limited buffer and is
therefore best used while chasing momentum in the last phase of a
trend.



Figure 6.27: This mega up move in Reliance Capital on 16 March 2017 proved impossible to
cap! The stock opened higher in the morning. It was also in the news due to a mega analyst

meet scheduled for that evening. The stock rose almost 10% that day. The move was slow and
steady enough to provide multiple entry opportunities. The price consolidated in the afternoon

hours (remember our market timing theory). The last leg of the day’s move began in the last
trading hour with a breakout from the intraday range, accompanied by strong bullish candles.

You could have kept raising the stop loss continuously from the third bar onwards.



Figure 6.28: Maruti creates magic. The final surge of the third day could be traded trailing
the stop loss with every single candle.

So we have now seen four methods for entering a trade in a trending
market, and three methods to trail the stop loss during favourable trades.
Don’t go anywhere, we will see more trading tactics in the next chapter.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 7

OceanofPDF.com



Trend Trading Tactics — Part II

Managing Ongoing Trades, Counter Trend Trading and Trading Gaps

Introduction

Were this not a book but a live session, we would have wanted to know how
many of you have been active in the trading jungle, and for how long?

Have you been making money?
Do you do your own analysis?
Have you found yourself a trading system that has worked for you

consistently, over a reasonable period of time?
Is there a pattern to your repeated successes or failures?
In short, do you have a time-tested method in your trading armoury?
If, yes, enjoy the ride. If not, then one must sit up and think. One must

analyse what has been going wrong. One must change one’s trading
method, if required. One must modify the trading tactics if and as required.
There is no point going on and on repeating the same mistakes, and then
expecting different results. If there has been a pattern to your losing trades
and yet you keep on doing what you have always done, then you will keep
on getting the same results that you have got thus far.

You must stop, analyse and realise, or keep getting penalized.

In this chapter we will learn about the various methods of managing an
ongoing trade right till a profitable exit. If a trade hasn’t worked, the stop
loss will take care of it and throw you out. If it works well, we need to
manage it actively in various ways.



"When you observe a harmful pattern or a habit forming in your life... you must reflect on it.
Genius is knowing when to stop." — An apt dialogue from the Bollywood film, Dear Zindagi.

We will also learn about counter trend trading. And, then, we will see
how to handle the various types of gaps.

Trade Management
A sound trade entry is only a small part of the entire process of making
money. Trade management is an extremely crucial function and plays a big
role in defining a trader’s bottom line. The entire game is about managing
your stay during the trading move by way of timely entry and timely exit.

We do not want to leave too much money on the table for the next trader
by exiting a profitable position before time. We aren't here for charity. Nor
do we want to lose the profits we've earned by overstaying our welcome. So
timing is a crucial element. As traders, we must be as fast as a cheetah, as
sharp as a hawk, and alert to every changing scene in the playfield.



Setting Trade Targets

In ranging markets, targets can be the upper and the lower boundaries of the
range. You will have to be patient to let the boundaries form clearly. For
this, you will need two highs and two lows at approximately similar levels.
The target could also be some important moving average line, or any other
levels that form some kind of hindrance to the continuation of moves.

When a clear trend resumes after a retracement or correction, the targets
can be kept at any of the three levels, namely 50%, 100%, or above 100%
of the total prior retracement. Which of the three works out in reality will
depend on the trend’s strength. In strong markets, each of these can get
surpassed easily. So watch each of them carefully and combine those levels
with your trailing stop loss technique. This will tell you exactly what is
happening around you, and you can then make the best of the situation.
Have a look at Figure 7.1 and Figure 7.2.

Figure 7.1 Trend resumption from support and from resistance and the three target levels in
each case, namely 50%, 100% and more than 100% of the preceding retracement.



Figure 7.2: This chart highlights the kind of expectations one can keep in a sideways trading
markets. As shown, the three targets to be kept are at 50% of the previous fall, at 100%, and

above the previous fall, say 150% or up to some important overhead resistance level.

Trade Exits in Different Types of Markets

One possibility is that the trade doesn't work. In that case, your exit will be
automatic by way of the stop loss.

In case the trade works, you can exit either by keeping a pre-determined
target as described above, or you can exit when the trailing stop loss kicks
you out.

When the market is in an expansion phase, good profits are made by
holding on to the right trades for a longer period of time. That could mean
the entire day, or even for more than a day. By keeping a pre-determined
target and exiting at that target, we do not want to cap our gains in a
generous market. That is where you can use the trailing stop loss tactics,
which we have discussed above. These will ensure that you neither exit too
early, nor too late.

On the other hand, when markets are range bound there is no point in
having unlimited and open targets. Exiting at pre-determined targets is a



better choice at such times.

Candle Signals that Tell You It’s Pack-up Time

If you are not amongst those who like exiting at a pre-determined target,
you should be looking for signs which tell you that your time in the trade is
up. What are those signs?

1. A rejection candle appearing at a crucial support or resistance, followed
by a confirmation of that rejection.

2. A giant bar taking the final leap in an ongoing move, as discussed
earlier in the chapter on candles. When price reaches some overhead
resistance in an uptrend, or a support below it in a downtrend, the
current leg of the ongoing move could stop. So this could be an exit
level. Stay alert to such developments.

3. When you see more than 50% of the previous move getting erased, that
could be the end of the current move. You can hope for the trend to
resume till this level, but not after that. Exit should be considered at
such points.

Also, never forget that these signals are more relevant when they appear
at important locations. Appearance of any of these at critical locations
demands special attention as highlighted through examples in Figures 7.3
and 7.4.



Figure 7.3: The chart of Dredging Corp shows that the trend resumed once the pullback or
upside retracement ends within 50% of the previous fall.

Figure 7.4: This is the chart of Canfin Homes for 23 May 2017. Up move of the day faces
resistance at the previous day’s high. Price has also risen strongly by then, so there is nothing

wrong in booking out the earned profits here.

The chart shown in Figure 7.5 shows all important factors coming
together. Look at it closely, and also read the details inset within the chart,
and you will understand and hear the entire orchestra playing together.



Figure 7.5: This chart captures all that we have learnt so far: daily pivots, moving averages (8
/ 20 / 50 / 200MA lines) and their alignment, strong candles on the trend side, and tiny candles

on pullbacks. The chart also shows the contraction phase spanning multiple days, breakout
from that range and from the previous high. The price closes at the high of the breakout on

Day 1, opens even higher the next morning, and continues to rise further. Also shown are the
trailing stop losses and the midway consolidations or halts. It shows a multiday move. What

more could a trader want?

Counter Trend Trading
Things that are denied often hold a lot of temptation and excitement. The
same applies in the markets as well. We are generally told to stay with the
trend. While that is generally the right thing to do, there are times when
opportunities exist to take a quick trade against the trend as well. That
brings us to our next topic — when to permit ourselves the liberty to go
counter to the trend?

We have learnt earlier that, at times, an ongoing trend gets a sudden boost
or momentum, often leading to the formation of multiple consecutive giant
candles or larger than normal candles. At such times, the price moves ahead



without any pullback or pause, and often strays far away from the zone of
equilibrium. Such a move can happen within no time.

The sheer enthusiasm, or panic, of market participants will lead to
extreme moves in the market and the price could reach levels that look
over-stretched. Crowds are often over emotional and also behave
irrationally. The tendency to copy or follow others is not limited to
monkeys and parrots! Knowingly or unknowingly, we humans often exhibit
the same tendencies.

Now, when the rapidly moving price hits some level of crucial resistance
on the upside, or some support on the downside, there can arise the chance
of a profitable counter trend relief rally, or pullback. This is especially true
in the case of over-stretched moves, or sharp rises and falls. While the trend
is intact at such times but there is a chance that the overextended price may
try to snap back towards the equilibrium zone or moving average levels.
This pattern works out especially nicely when the price is also hitting a
resistance or support from a higher time frame as well , and not just on the
trading time frame. It becomes stronger still when the 3, 5, 8 candle rule is
met. It gets even stronger if this entire phenomenon occurs at some
important market timing, as discussed earlier. The probability increases
when you see some reversal sign appearing at the resistance, support,
moving average line, especially when it gets confirmed by the next candle.

Say, we are looking at a downtrend and you have a 20MA line and / or
200MA line placed above the price. Let’s further say that the price has
fallen much below the MA line. There would then be a tendency for the
price to move back towards these averages. Those levels can be your target
for such trades. Let’s now understand the concept with some examples as to
how and when to permit yourself the liberty to rebel against the trend (see
Figures 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8).



Figure 7.6: This is an example of a counter trend trade during an uptrend. Towards the
middle of this Jet Airways chart, the price zooms away for three candles leaving both 20MA

and 200MA lines far below. The "gravitational" pull of the two MA lines being imminent, it’s a
fine counter trend trade setup which you can get into.

Figure 7.7: In this chart, the Bank Nifty trend is down but when the price plummets far
below the 20MA line with seven successive bear candles, a 150-point intraday counter trend

move beckons the day trader as the price gets pulled back to the 20MA line, and even above it.



Figure 7.8: The price of Torrent Pharma rises too rapidly and gets too far above the 20MA
line. It then retraces towards the 20MA line. That’s another counter trend trade for a day

trader.

Trading Gaps
Despite gaps being one of the most lucrative trade setups, most times
traders fail to at successfully trade opening gaps. Why is that? Let us
address this issue.

Opening gaps are a sign of momentum built up overnight, a sign of
strong emotion among market participants in the direction of the gap. A gap
has the capacity to change the direction of an existing trend and start a fresh
trend in the opposite direction. It can also occur in the direction of the
current trend and yet end that ongoing trend of multiple days. If handled
well, gaps can give you big money. Equally, they can wipe you out in a
big way if repeatedly mishandled. An opening gap could be genuine, in
which case the price can build on further from its opening levels.
Alternately, it could also be a fake one, in which case it can trap you.



In short, love it, like it, trade it or hate it — but you cannot ignore a gap.
So it is better to understand how to handle it. Let’s get going! We will not
be tackling gaps in the traditional way they are usually explained elsewhere
— for example, breakaway gaps, exhaustion gaps, runaway gaps, etc. We
have our own way of reading and using gaps. We are concerned not with
naming ceremonies but with the context coming at us from the left side of
the chart, i.e. from the recent past, and the impact that it may have on the
chart’s right side.

Gap in the Direction of the Trend — and the Trend Continues . . .

There are two ways of entering a trade after a gap in the direction of the
trend.

The first way is to wait for a retracement back towards some support or
resistance as the case may be, depending on the trending side and the gap.

Say the trend is up and the gap is on the up side as well, in which case
you wait for a pullback towards some significant level, whether it be pivot
levels, moving averages, the previous day’s close, or the previous day’s
high. You enter when the up move resumes from such a support, using one
of the entry tactics explained earlier.

Conversely, if the trend is down and if the gap is down as well, you wait
for a pullback up towards a significant resistance. And you enter from there
as the downtrend resumes, using any one of the entry tactics already
discussed earlier (see Figures 7.9, 7.10 and 7.11).



Figure 7.9: In an uptrend, Jet Airways opens with a gap, followed by a minor initial
retracement in the second candle that stays within the range of the opening candle. Soon, the

move takes out the high of the second red candle, and the stock then moves up further.

Figure 7.10: Jain Irrigation opens with a minor morning gap above the previous close, then
follows a retracement till a support, followed by the resumption of the up move.



Figure 7.11: Reliance Capital opens below the previous close with a gap, we see a minor
direction retracement, and the trend then resumes its downward direction.

Now, let’s see the second way to trade gaps.
There will be times when there is no retracement after the opening gap.

Instead, the price keeps going higher, or lower as the case may be, without
any pullbacks. At such times you can wait for the first few minutes, say 5
minutes or 15 minutes, depending on your level of aggressiveness as a
trader and your mental make-up, and observe what the market is doing. If
the trend is up, and if the scrip takes out the high of the first 5- or 15-
minute range, and if the momentum seems to be sustaining, then you can
enter using the breakout entry tactic explained earlier. This is illustrated by
the examples in Figures 7.12 and 7.13.



Figure 7.12: Bank of India opens with an upside gap, and straightaway builds further on it.
Arrows inset in the chart show the three possible trade entry points.

Figure 7.13: ONGC opens with a gap on the downside and the price continues to head lower.
The trade entry point is indicated with an arrow inset in the chart.



You should also keep an eye on the level of the hurdle — a support in
case the trend is down and a resistance in case the trend is up. If it is too
close, and too strong, then the trade will have lower chances of being
successful to any sizeable extent. If the path is clear, the move will be
smoother.

Gap Against the Current Trend — Yet the Trend Continues . . .

If the gap is against the trend — for example, if the trend is up and the
opening is gap down — that can give you a long entry at a lower price. If
the trend is down and the opening gap is on the upside, it can give you a
short entry at a better, i.e. higher price. Such trades will have a greater
probability of working out if the opening gap takes the price action towards
some important level of support in the case of a downside gap in an
uptrend, or some level of resistance in the case of an upside gap in a
downtrend. Ideally, you should wait for the initial euphoria or panic to settle
down and see if the trend is indeed resuming. Sometimes the price may go
just a little bit higher, or lower, before the ongoing trend resumes.

That’s because most times the market is absorbing the overnight news flows
before resuming its own journey after the first few minutes. If you enter
assuming that the trend has changed because of the gap, you may get
trapped. Let some level of support or resistance first come in before you
enter. Allow some time and space for the trend resumption if it’s going to
happen, and only then take your call. There’s no hurry. You will be better
placed to decode what is happening once the initial few minutes pass.
Always remember that desperation in D-Street will only lead to disaster.
Please review Figures 7.14 and 7.15 with these points in mind.



Figure 7.14: Birla Nuvo has corrected sharply downward in the previous few days and it then
opened with a minor upside gap which only gives a stronger move on the downside later on.

This happened when the lower end of a 2-day range was broken.

Figure 7.15: Reliance gaps down at the open but the uptrend doesn't come to an end with
that. Soon, the up move restarts with a big bull candle making a fresh 9-year high on RBI

policy date, 6 April 2017. Many entries were possible, as shown by arrows on the chart. A day
trader’s delight for sure.



Gap in the Direction of the Trend Which Puts an End to the Ongoing
Trend

There will be times when the trend is taking the price in a particular
direction via multiple candles. The move might, in fact, be looking
overstretched due to a series of successive significantly large candles of the
trending colour next to each other in a row, 3, 5, 8 candles or more. The
next morning the market opens with a gap in the direction of the trend. At
times, the driver behind such jumps could be some positive macro or micro
news. Now, if this gap appears after an already over-stretched up move and
takes the market towards some resistance level — or support if it is a
downtrend — then there could be an immediate pullback from there. The
over-extended price might have been looking for a reason to correct. There
could be profit booking that takes the price back towards the moving
averages.

In such a case, you can profit from a counter trend trade. There could be
many people who may have got trapped on the other side at the opening;
don’t forget to say thank you to them. After all, they are the ones who will
help you reach your target. The day begins with a move in one direction,
say up, but the scrip soon changes its mind and goes the other way. There
will be players who will hold onto their opinions, as well as losses. They
will get trapped when the move extends in the other direction. Trapped
longs will then take the price down at a rapid rate; conversely, the trapped
shorts will take the price higher. Those smart traders who are holding this
book right now and reading it are the ones who will make a killing; see the
examples depicted in Figures 7.16, 7.17 and 7.18.



Figure 7.16: Hindustan Petroleum had been falling for some days. The final gap, which you
can see in the middle of this chart, puts an end to that downfall and gives a great 2-day up

move on 22 March 2017. Two good entries are marked in the chart. If you fail to understand
the technicals in detail, you can get trapped on the short side here. But if you do, and even if
this reversal doesn't sustain for multiple days, we would have made our profits on the given

day. That’s it.

Figure 7.17: After a major rise, a gap up in the price of Bajaj Finance fails to make newer
highs. The stock was also at the upper end of the range which had been developing over the



previous few days. That resistance leads to a strong fall, and gives a move towards the other
end of range.

Figure 7.18: Towards the middle of this chart, the price of Amara Raja Batteries opens
around  914 with a gap up. Many days of rise end with a final gap up that, however, fails to

sustain. Those who bought at the open are trapped.

Trend Reversal after a Gap in the Direction Opposite to the Current
Trend

Let’s say the trend has been down for the past two or three days in a row
and most market players expect the trend to continue heading down in the
short term. But, you guessed it, the market has its own mind. The next
morning it opens with a gap in the opposite direction. But, no, that doesn't
give you a better short sell entry. The price continues going in the new
direction, namely upward, and this price action results in a reversal of the
immediate term trend. You can then enter a long trade after waiting for
some time. If it looks like a reversal, you can use any of our entry tactics
and take the trade accordingly. The only two ways of knowing what is



happening are, one, by keeping the context and the trend in mind and, two,
by showing some patience and closely following the charts.

This setup will work better when the short term trend is over-done in
any one direction and is ripe for a reversal. Let’s say the higher time
frame trend is up and there was a sharp correction in the stock leading to a
short term down move for multiple days. That correction ends with an
upside gap, which also sees further build up post the gap on the higher side.
This reversal is now taking the stock in the same direction as the higher
time frame trend, which is up. So, while it is a reversal on the smaller time
frame, but it is a trend resumption on the higher time frame.

Such a price move can be aggressive and highly dynamic. It will require
a great deal of agility and concentration to enter at an appropriate level. You
have to be relatively quick in making your decision and taking action as a
newly started trend reversal can pack in high levels of energy, especially in
the first few hours of market opening. Those who don't grasp this will be
left holding their earlier positions. By preparing yourself well, you get an
edge over others; as examples, see Figures 7.19 to 7.22.

Figure 7.19: Bhushan Steel reverses its over-extended downtrend of the past few days when a
very minor opening gap appears in the opposite direction and the price then builds further on
it. This is highlighted in the stock’s intraday chart shown here. The very next candle is a giant
candle as well, which takes out multiple small red candles on its left side. This price went on

much higher and the stock had doubled by the last week of May 2017 from these levels of
March 2017.



Figure 7.20: Daily chart of Bhushan Steel — see how the price doubles between March and
May 2017.

Figure 7.21: In PNB, the downtrend ends with a sudden gap up opening the next morning.
This story too continued for a much longer time.



Figure 7.22: This chart of Indiabulls Housing Finance shows more than one type of gap, and
how the trend both continues after a gap, as well as how it reverses after another.

The last point we wish to emphasise here is that if you know your job
well, and if you have done your pre-market preparations properly, you will
be able to find the right entry in the right stock. And the right entry in the
right stock will work, no matter which time frame you choose on intraday.
Money can be made with a 3-minute chart, as well as with a 15-minute
chart. There is no right or wrong chart. What varies is the kind of
expectations that you must keep with different time frames, and the kind of
effort each one entails. A strong and clear trend can give a good trade on the
shortest of time spans. You have to know what suits you best, and take your
calls accordingly. The example in Figure 7.23 illustrates these points.



Figure 7.23: Ujjiivan has been in a short term downtrend for a few days. The stock then
opens lower, rises till the previous close, and gives an excellent short entry. The point being
emphasised is that any time frame will work if you use it correctly. This is a 3-minute chart

which gives a solid intraday trade with 20MA and multiple entries.

Moral: Profitable entry is possible only once you learn to read gaps like a book.

Pyramiding — Position Building with Multiple
Contracts
Those who trade multiple contracts may choose to enter long, or short, from
plunges and spikes. Or, they can do so after deeper corrections. Once the
trade starts working in your favour, and once you are in profits, you can
then add to your positions. Later, you can keep exiting the various positions
as each of your target levels are achieved.



Milestones Covered
We have covered a considerable number of techniques and strategies by
now. Let us briefly recapitulate these before moving on to the next chapter.

We began the trend trading chapters (Chapters 6 and 7) by considering
the time frames we should use for pre-market preparation. We also
considered the time frames for actual day trading during market hours. We
described why we begin with daily charts during preparation, and then drill
down deeper into intraday charts for trade entry during market hours. We
went over the need to also review the weekly and monthly charts once a
week and once a month, respectively. Our arsenal has three main pillars till
now. We use floor pivots and swing pivots for determining location. We
also use moving averages for trend analysis and location. We use candle
study for trade management and timing.

We have seen the kinds of trade setup that must be in place before we
make any commitment.

We have learnt four styles of trade entry; entry on correction, entry on
minor pullback, entry on consolidation, and entry on rejection. We learnt
how to place the initial stop loss in such a way that we are not unnecessarily
thrown out of a profitable trade. We also saw how to do so without taking
undue risk.

We've learnt two different methods for exiting trades in two different
kinds of markets, namely trading markets and trending markets. We
focussed on three methods of trailing stop losses, including the two steps
forward and one back method, as well as the 8MA line and 20MA line
trailing techniques.

Then we moved on to the challenging topic of how and when to go
counter trend. Finally, we saw how to handle gaps, both which occur in the
direction of the trend, and those that occur against it. We saw how gaps can
lead to better entries when the trend stays sustained. We also saw how gaps
can end the current trend and lead to a reversal, i.e. a new trend.



Right, that’s quite a lot to chew on. Let’s take a short break to get
rejuvenated so that we come back recharged when we go swinging.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 8

OceanofPDF.com



Trading Ranged Markets

Ways of Swinging Sideways

Introduction

It has history. It has mystery. And to unravel it all, you will have to build
with it, a real strong chemistry. That’s the market for you. Once you start
reading the market like a book, you would be able to create market magic
for yourself on a consistent basis. This chemistry includes not just an
understanding of what impact any fresh development might have on the
price of a stock, but also knowing how much of that impact is already
priced into the stock. It also includes having a grip on understanding the
markets, not just when the price is moving clearly up or down but also
when the trend is not clear.

Most books on markets focus on clearly trending moves and charts.
There’s nothing wrong with that; after all, one must select the best setups
for trades. Additionally, however, since markets spend a huge amount of
time moving sideways, one must also focus on getting a solid grip over
sideways markets. Sideways markets are never easy to trade. The setup for
a sideways market will look different from that in a clearly trending market.
The required skills for making money from such a market are also different.
If one does not understand these differences, all the earnings made during
trending times might be easily lost or significantly eroded during ranging
times. It is, therefore, extremely important to know how to trade ranged, or
ranging, markets. We have covered a few aspects of this earlier. In this
chapter, we will sharpen our focus through learning additional skills and
cover more scenarios and setups that recur frequently in sideways markets.
Understanding these trading styles is especially crucial for those who
like to restrict their trading to indices, like Nifty or Bank Nifty because
indices stay in ranges more often than not, and far more often than do



individual stocks. So, if you are among those traders who like to stay with
only one or two trading instruments, it is essential for you to master how to
trade any and every kind of pattern that may appear and reappear in those
limited number of instruments.

We will also see some examples that will teach us how to try and
understand if a particular news event is already factored in the current price
of a stock or index. If it is, then the event will not have any further impact
on price. Or, sometimes, it may even have the opposite effect, i.e. a stock
may rise on bad news, or fall on good news. We will try and understand
when and why this happens, and how to anticipate this so that we can trade
it to our advantage.

And, yes, one more thing. We often hear experts say, "Buy the dip, go
long on correction,” or "Sell the rally, go short from higher levels,” etc. But
not very often do you get to learn when to actually short a rally or buy a
dip, and when not to do so. As a result, such advice may not always work in
real time markets. So, when does it fail? And why does it fail? What should
be done to avoid such failures? Without getting into these nuances, our
know-how remains incomplete; and half knowledge is extremely
dangerous, not just in trading but in any aspect of life.

Two Ways to Trade the Markets
Depending on the market phase, you have to trade differently. Learning to
recognise the phase the market is in is thus a prerequisite to trading each
phase successfully. A trending market must be looked at differently, as
compared to a tightly ranging market. You have to learn to weave each
factor into your plan, especially if you trade a limited number of
instruments. That’s what we call a 360-degree view of the entire situation.
That’s the way to go:

1. You stick to one pattern and trade any and every instrument depicting
that particular pattern. For this, you must have an eye on newer
securities every now and then, as different ones keep falling in and out
of flavour.



2. You stick only to a limited number of instruments, say Nifty and Bank
Nifty, and trade as many patterns in those instruments as possible. For
this, you must know and understand the personality of each instrument
in detail, and how they behave in different kinds of markets.

So you either stick to a given instrument or stock and trade all its
variations and moves, whether in ranging market or in trending times. Or,
stick to trading only clearly trending stocks, and keep looking for such
stocks regularly.

Important Parameters for Trading Sideways
Markets
In ranging markets, levels such as the previous day’s high / low,
morning range, previous close, previous week’s high / low, etc. are all
very important. Moving averages and the central pivot are less important
in such markets as they are likely to repeatedly get crossed over on both
sides.

Price moves in sideways markets are limited in size and restricted within
the boundaries of the range. It takes extremely accurate timing to trade
narrow ranges. So you must always heed all the significant levels that have
a higher probability of being respected.

It is also important to maintain a very strict stop loss in sideways
markets — absolutely nothing wider than one bar or the nearest swing
high / low should ever be allowed. Any method of stop loss other than this
will widen the loss per trade and reduce your chances of closing the trade in
profit. There could also be a higher proportion of trades that might not
work. Very often you might even have to cut off your trades that fail to
work as expected. So if you limit your loss to just one bar, and if you can
make 6, 8, 10, or 12 bars in trades that do work, only then does it make
sense to trade such markets.

Extremely well timed entries, from precisely accurate levels and
locations, along with tight money management is what makes for



successful trading in sideways markets.

Characteristics of Sideways Markets
In a trending market we expect either higher highs and higher closings or
lower lows and lower closings in the direction of the trend on most days. In
other words, we basically expect additional progress in the trend’s direction.

In ranging markets, on the other hand, what we often see is negligible net
movement at the end of the day. If markets open at higher levels, they often
spend the better part of the day in moving to the other end of the trading
band. Or they may open with an upside gap but later move down lower. On
the other hand, if the market opens gap down it will try to rise higher in the
remaining part of the day till it touches some important level on the other
side and faces resistance there.

When the trend is clear, buying on dips and selling on rallies will work
well. But the same strategy will not work well in a ranging market. In such
markets, you cannot go and buy any or every dip. You cannot sell any and
every rally either. Trying to enter dips or rallies in the middle of the range
will do more harm than good. Such trades may not be very fruitful,
especially if the range is narrow. It becomes crucial that you wait till the
price reaches either of the extremes of the range. That increases the odds in
your favour and you may get a sizeable move. Thus if the market opens gap
up and then starts falling, it might be a good idea to go short instead of
trying to buy that dip. Correspondingly, if the market opens gap down and
then rises, it might not be wise to try and short the rally. It might be a better
idea to go long for the target of the upper end of the range. So you see, in a
sideways market the entire outlook — the action as well as the expected
outcome — is different as compared to that in trending market. Unless a
trader understands this, he might end up using a good strategy but in the
wrong phase. Once you have assessed the market’s phase correctly, you
know what to do. Also, with tight risk management your stop loss would be
just below the entry bar and your entry will be from the extreme end of the
range. You will enter when you see the price starting to move towards the



other end. Thus, even if you are wrong, you will realise it early. If you
mindlessly buy every dip and sell every rally, you will reduce your chances
of being profitable.

Even in a trending market, for that matter, if a stock has broken down,
say, 5% to 7% on a given day, and if it opens another 4% gap down the next
morning, then you do not short at the open. Correspondingly, in a trending
market which is gapping up you may wait for a pullback to lower levels and
then enter long from a support. One size doesn't fit all, as we keep
emphasising. You must understand what you are being handed before
handling it. Also, if one is graduating from investing into trading, it will
take time to change one’s mind-set. You cannot keep holding onto opinions
while the move is running against you. Until you clearly understand these
nuances you will not know which strategy to use, when, and where. Even
the best strategy will fail if applied or used incorrectly. If such a thing
happens with you, then you must try and dig deeper into the reasons for the
failure of a given trade. Correct yourself if you think you applied a strategy
incorrectly. Exit, and then think coolly. Then use the correct method, and
see the magic work out for you.

In other words, dump the wrong trade and not the right strategy. Stick to
the right strategy and not to the losses arising out of incorrect
implementation. Often some traders do the exact opposite. They stick to
losses from a wrong trade, and dump their time-tested strategies. And then
curse whoever they can.

Appropriate knowledge is your best insurance against losses. The problem lies in not
knowing what you are doing.

Let’s now move ahead and consider all these points on real market charts.
We will study many examples from live markets because there is no better
way to learn trading than by studying examples. Earlier in the book we used
examples of individual stocks that were trending nicely. In this chapter, for
the benefit of index traders we will use examples of index trades from the
two indices, Nifty and Bank Nifty.



As shown in Figure 8.1, Bank Nifty had had two strong days back to
back. Day 3 was expected to be sideways since taking a pause, or trying to
catch up with averages, after a good run is only natural. On Day 3, the
index again opened strongly and tried to go on higher, but faced resistance
at R1. Now, think back to our pivot theory which says if the price fails to
take out R1 it might see a pullback towards the central pivot point, which in
this case lay approximately a good 150 points away. A day trader could
have gone short from R1 for a target of the pivot point. From levels of
around R1, the index also looked stretched quite far from the 200MA line.
Also, in the previous two days it had risen almost 1,000 points already. It
was well worth a short trade. Of course, only and strictly after watching the
price behaviour on charts.

Figure 8.1: Bank Nifty 5-minute chart showing a 100-point short trade.

Later as the price loiters around the pivot point, the market seemed to
have lost momentum. Had you been watching this chart armed with the
knowledge gained earlier in the book, you too would have sensed the loss
of momentum and the slowdown during the day. One could still have taken
a long trade as the index started moving higher but with a lower expectation
about the target compared to the morning short trade. It could have given
you some 30 to 50 points, unlike the first trade with over 100 points of



intraday move. The price finally meets up with the 200MA line before
moving higher.

The next chart in Figure 8.2, spans the same three days as in Figure 8.1
but using is the Amibroker software showing the CPR and other details of
the CPR as described earlier. It will help you understand the context and the
trade in an even better way. Have a look.

Figure 8.2: As the chart shows, the sideways move of Bank Nifty in the later part of the day
stays within the CPR, which happens to be about 60 points wide. The better trade for the day
was the short trade in the morning, while the trades later in the day in extreme narrow range

were difficult and less profitable.

The day following the day charted in Figure 8.2 (marked day 2 in Figure
8.3) was again a sideways day for Bank Nifty — but with a difference. Let
us see what was different, and check out how it was best traded (see Figure
8.3).



Figure 8.3: 5-minute chart shows how the index opens higher on Day 1 and then moves lower.
On Day 2, it opens lower and moves higher.

Long trades were easier in the example of Figure 8.3 because these
would have basically been on the trending side. Till the time the index
remains sideways, however, even these up moves would be much shorter
and thus a little difficult to trade, especially if the move does not begin from
a crucial location. In the chart in Figure 8.3, Bank Nifty begins lower on
Day 2. That throws up an opportunity for the first trade of the day, which is
on the long side. As noted earlier, when the index opens higher in a
sideways market, it could well then spend the rest of the day moving lower.
When it opens lower, on the other hand, it then often makes an attempt to
move higher during the rest of the day. The horizontal 20MA and 200MA
lines show that it is a consolidation day, and that tells us a lot about what to
expect and how to trade. In such cases, your first entry for the day might
occur within the first 30 minutes of market opening. In case the swing lows
and swing highs of the two days also match, it serves to confirm that the
market is sideways. When the index makes a second attempt to rise from
levels near to the previous close, one could have attempted another long



trade for the day which also happens to be in the direction of the main
trend. Each of these locations could be used for precise entry and exits.

Now, have a look at the next chart in Figure 8.4, which is a 5-minute
chart for Day 3.

Figure 8.4: Bank Nifty Day 3 — again a sideways day.

The opening on Day 3 was within the previous day’s range and almost in
the middle of it. There was, therefore, no point trying to take the early trade,
whether up or down. In a sideways market it is all the more important that
we always initiate a trade only from a perfect entry location, which could be
either of the ends of the range, or the previous high, low, close, etc. But in
the latter part of the day, as Bank Nifty makes a higher low at 23,187 and
starts moving even higher from there, that’s a trade we should concentrate
on.

On Day 2, the lows were made around 23,147. Now it’s the third day of
consolidation and we may expect higher levels ahead. Or, at the very least,
we say that there are chances of a breakout in the second half of the day.
This trade is again starting from a congestion zone where there was a lot of
activity in the past days at the level of around 23,180. Just before the start



of this up move, the 20MA and 200MA lines are both close to the price
level. Contraction, or merging of levels, can invite an expansion from there.
That’s an added advantage. This move gives a trade of 100+ points. And
that’s the only move in this index for the day. It begins exactly from the
central pivot point, so there is a big location advantage, and the obvious
target is R1. The chart in Figure 8.5 shows a zoomed view of this move on
Day 3.

Figure 8.5: Up, close and personal with Bank Nifty on Day 3. A zoomed view of the chart in
Figure 8.4.

The chart in Figure 8.5 also shows how the move progressed for the rest
of Day 3. Please note the last-minute breakout effort above 23,295 / 23,300
levels. Target R1 was achieved. Each formation of a higher low showed
increased chances of a breakout ahead. In this way, we have managed a
decent intraday trade in Bank Nifty that we kept following for three days in
a row, and all the three days were sideways ranging days. Yet we took home
some money:

On Day 1, we took a short trade by 9:30 a.m., followed by a long trade
later in the day around 10:30 a.m.
On Day 2, we took a long trade early morning by 9:30 a.m.
On Day 3, we took a long trade after 11:30 a.m.



This is an example of how to trade sideways markets. On Day 1 we got
two trades, and on each of the next two days we got just one trade apiece,
though we could have done even two on the Day 3. Incidentally, these were
the last three days of May 2017.

When a setup appears ripe, don't hesitate. When the setup is under formation, show no
desperation. Got it?

Now let us see what the main market index Nifty was doing all this while,
and how a Nifty trader would have done during the same period. Let’s start
with the 5-minute chart of Nifty on Day 1, which is displayed in Figure 8.6.

Figure 8.6: Nifty on Day 1.

As you would notice, the index had made a big move on the previous two
days. Accordingly, a huge amount of action was not expected on this day.
Compared to the limited expectation, however, we saw quite a decent move.
The previous day the market had closed at its high point, and the next
morning it proceeded further from there. It would have been safer had there
been a bit of a consolidation, or a minor dip, before any further rise. Well,
markets don't move to favour us. They do what they do, and we must learn



to live with it. Nifty faced resistance at R1. If a long entry were taken at the
start of the day, or if the trade was being carried forward from the previous
day, this was a sign to exit. A wiser course would have been to take the
short trade from R1 towards the obvious lower target of the central pivot
point. That also happened to be quite a decent 60- to 70-point move for an
intraday trader.

When this dip from R1 saw immediate buying, that was a call to then go
long for the day. It made sense also because it came after an initial dip and
also from a very crucial intraday level. Timing-wise, it was post the early
morning rapid fire moves. Often we have seen that the initial few ticks are
all over the place which leaves the index players in confusion. Once that
phase is done and over with, the move that emerges is much more
comprehensible and the directional signals also are much more reliable.

Next the Nifty temporarily broke the morning low as well as the previous
close, but recovered soon enough. This would have left a few people
trapped on the short side whose subsequent short covering would help the
long players. This long trade gave a sizeable move of 60 to 80 points for the
day, which was definitely more than expected. Even if you did not take the
initial short trade, this second opportunity became available and that too in
the direction of the trend. This would have also given you enough time after
the opening so that all the initial euphoria and panic associated with the
early ticks would have settled down, both within you as well in the markets.

On Day 2 and Day 3, Nifty offered only minor opportunities. The market
got more and more compressed. The range went on getting narrower and
narrower. Nevertheless, a day trader exclusively into index trading could
still make smaller trades. Does this make sense? Yes, it does. Let’s see how.

Say, a trader gets some 20 to 30 points on Nifty on such sideways days.
He then makes some  1,500 to  2,250 per lot. On some days a trader may
get even more than one such trade. Now, one lot of Nifty futures would
have cost less than  58,000*. The cost of transaction and taxes per lot
would be, say,  100 to  150. This leaves the intraday trader with returns of
3.5 percent within a few hours. And that’s with just one trade. Even with
your cost going a little higher, the day’s returns may still be more than 2%.
Not bad at all. The important thing is to be more and more accurate in



timing the trade. If you can manage a trade with a stop loss of 10 points and
a target of 30, that’s good enough. Similarly, with a 30 to 40 point stop loss
on Bank Nifty, if you get 70 to 80 points on the target side, you are making
returns of some 3% to 3.5% in a matter of few minutes, or hours; again, not
bad. These trades, however, require very tight risk management. While the
quantum of these moves may not sound very dramatic, you will also get a
few bigger days in a month. Make use of those when they come along.
That’s how it is for those who wish to stick to Nifty and Bank Nifty. For
those willing to take newer ideas, there’s always something or the other that
might be clearly trending, and that may give bigger moves in the process.
Stocks like Escorts, Hindustan Lever, Ashok Leyland, for instance, gave
huge moves in the last few days of May 2017. So, markets always have got
enough to offer to one and all. You get your share depending on what you
like and what suits you.

Let’s now consider Nifty’s charts for Day 2 (Figure 8.7) and Day 3
(Figure 8.8), respectively.

The chart in Figure 8.7 shows that on Day 2 there were two opportunities
to trade on the long side from previous swing lows to highs. This level had
seen much action and was a significant level. The move was from 9,586/90
to about 9,625/30.

Figure 8.7: Nifty chart for Day 2 with the previous day also shown for reference.



The chart in Figure 8.8 shows the trade for Day 3, as the index makes a
higher low. One could have entered around 9,614, with stop loss at 9,600
and the support of multiple moving average lines available, especially the
200MA line.

Figure 8.8: Nifty on Day 3, with the day trade shown.

Let’s now include Day 4, namely 1 June 2017.
As you can see in Figure 8.9, on Day 3 Nifty had closed near the upper

end of the range, at 9,629 to be precise, after a futile effort to break out. It
had turned back from a high of 9,640. It opened around the same level on
the morning of Day 4. The very first candle was a red one suggesting an
initial downward pull. There was then no question of buying in the middle
of the range; rather, one would sell from the top end of the range, or at
around the level of 9,640 which was the previous high. That was also the
R1 level for the day. This level had been touched twice earlier but not
crossed. This was again a sign of initial weakness and a consequent pull
towards the previous low could be expected. The price initially moved
towards the pivot (9,625) as shown in the chart. Another attempt to rise



failed from there, and there was also a confluence of 20MA and 50MA lines
around this pivot level. This was a clear invitation for a short trade towards
the lower end, since the breakout of Day 3 did not find any follow-through
for itself. That short trade ends exactly at the previous low. With an entry
around 9,630 to 9,640, and a stop loss around 9,640-50, your target would
be either the round figure of 9,600, or 9,590, which was also the previous
low. And that’s precisely how it turned out.

Figure 8.9: Nifty chart from Day 2 to Day 4 with different trading opportunities highlighted.

The index found support and started moving higher, providing a long
entry at around 9,605 with stop loss at 9,590. This was after 3 or 4 candles
of rest. The obvious target had now to be the top end of the range and that’s
exactly what you got. Nifty moved to 9,635-38, before shying away again.
These two trades combined would have given you some 60-plus points, and
you could have churned and turned around your capital twice in the day.
You would have made some 7% returns intraday. Even if you made 4% or
5%, and not 7%, it’s not bad at all for a few hours of work! The support of
pivots and MA lines adds to your conviction but, basically, a sideways
market can be traded even solely on the basis of swing highs and lows, and
previous highs and lows. These would suffice.



As you can see, the entire movement of Day 4 remained within the range
of Day 3. That’s how sideways markets behave. A temporary break of these
boundaries will immediately reverse on the other sides.

What a Trader Must Pay Attention To
In a sideways market, what a trader must pay attention to are the high
and low of the previous session. One can easily trade a sideways market
with the help of these two values alone.

In trending markets, on the other hand, depending on the trend side you
may see higher and higher, or lower and lower, pivots and MA lines every
day. The pivots in a sideways market, on the other hand, will neither be
rising nor falling.

Let’s now look at the next two charts of Bank Nifty (Figure 8.10) and
Nifty (Figure 8.11) respectively, using Amibroker which show the entire
context and make clear how one must trade a sideways market.

The chart in Figure 8.10 highlights how during a sideways market the
CPR stays horizontal and adjacent to the CPR of nearby days. The price
does not cross above R1 or below S1 on any of the days, remaining within
the band of R1 and S1, and this coincides with the previous day’s high and
previous day’s low on many of the days. So rather than expecting R2 after
R1 and R3 after R2, we play the high and low of the previous day. That’s it.
Let’s live up to our promise of keeping things simple. We have also covered
these characteristics earlier during the pivot chapters, remember?
You can see the phenomenon very clearly here as we discuss each move on
the charts, from level to level. And, it works amazingly well.



Figure 8.10: This is the Bank Nifty chart from 26 May to 1 June 2017. Initially there were
some trending days, and then came the 4 ranging days we have been discussing.

The same thing can be seen in the chart of Nifty in Figure 8.11, for the
same time period.



Figure 8.11: Nifty chart for 6 days from 26 May to 1 June 2017. The initial 2 were trending
days, and then came the 4 ranging days in the new week.

The red lines are R1 and S1 as noted earlier, and the blue lines are the
CPR.

The trader must treat the range between R1 and the previous high as a
zone, and the range between S1 and the previous low as another zone. This
will help you understand the moves of the sideways market. Only when you
recognize the highs and lows correctly, will you know how to trade them.

There will be times when the indices may make attempts to break out.
Many of these attempts may fail before you get a real breakout with strong
follow through. At times, the price may fall back into the range. At other
times, the range bracket may simply shift a little higher or lower depending
on the direction of the breakout. The price may again start hovering within
the newly formed range, instead of continuing the move further in the
breakout direction. Such things will happen, and you must learn to live with
them. Nevertheless, you may still be able to find some trades using smaller
targets and tight risk managements. There will also be days when the
market will contract to such an extent that taking a trade would not be
feasible. Don't trade on those days. It is not necessary to trade every single
day. In fact, it is extremely important to recognise when not to trade.

During breakouts you may find really good opportunities within the
initial fifteen minutes itself. During a ranging situation, it may be
completely different.

The other times when good opportunities could emerge might be around
1:30 p.m. and 2:30 p.m. News based moves can, of course, come anytime.
So keep all this in mind and trade small when only small trades are
available in sideways market. Trade big on clearly trending days. Stay on
the sidelines when the environment is not apt for a trade, whether because
the range is too narrow or the moves too erratic. If you don't mess with the
market every single day, and trade wisely during tradeable days, you should
be able to stay in the green at the end of the month even with limited



instruments. Those who are willing to trade a variety of instruments may
choose to trade only when the instrument is clearly trending.

Let’s now consider the chart of Bank Nifty in Figure 8.12. This chart
depicts Day 5, where the range shifts higher, the index breaks out but
doesn't get a solid follow through.

Figure 8.12: Bank Nifty chart shows two trades for Day 5, a day when the range shifts higher
as the index breaks out but without a solid follow through.

The index trades between the new highs created during early ticks from
the level of the breakout. Later, it does give a trade worth some 60 to 80
points twice during the day. Even if you took one opportunity out of the
two, you would still have made some money for the day. The market had
gapped up at the open due to overnight global cues. But that wasn't enough
to give a follow through on the upside and the market started falling
immediately after the first tick itself. The ideal recipe for a genuine
breakout would require a narrow range for many past days, added to some
macro news that can impact the economy. When this leads to a gap up or
gap down at the opening, and if the turn takes place in a sharp way — a big



bullish bar taking out big red bar, for example, or vice versa — then there
are higher chances of seeing a follow through. In this case, some of the
ingredients were missing. While the index made an attempt to rise after the
first strong red bar, but it was stopped by R1. That was a clear sign to take a
short trade from R1 (23,360) to a pivot or previous close (23,290- 23,270),
with a 20-point stop loss at around 23,380 / 90. The sudden and sharp move
takes the price to the target pretty soon. But it still holds above the pivot and
stays above the previous close, as well as above the 200MA line and forms
a higher high in the process. In doing this, it remains in the positive
territory. You get a second trade with an entry around 23,310- 23,315 worth
another 70 to 80 points. Stop loss would again be around 23,280 which is
30 to 35 points lower. Have a look at the entire explanation through the
chart shown in Figure 8.12. Despite the early attempt to break out, the index
stays sideways.

With the end of Day 5, we have come to the weekend. Let’s see what the
market offers us ahead. Till then, let’s take a break from markets and enjoy
the outdoors. The universe has been supportive as we write on sideways
markets; the markets remained sideways.

An Important Point in All the Above Charts

One important point to note is that on Day 1 and Day 4, there were sharp
intraday plunges. Such plunges, or spikes, are very good for traders. These
sudden and sharp moves typically take the price to the extreme ends of the
range, leading to a higher probability move towards the other end. This will
happen once the relevant support or resistance is met. This may have a
higher probability of working out well when the support or resistance is met
at some important market hour.

The point being made is that the market should first get spent out in one
direction, in terms of both time and distance. This also creates traps for
people who may enter the move at its tail end. When the index reverses,
those who are trapped will help you achieve your target in the opposite
direction pretty fast, like it happened in the above charts. When the market
starts getting strongly biased in one direction, it attracts players to enter in
that direction. This directional bias may not be there early morning when



the index might be choppy, but may get created by noon. So both time and
distance, or the length of the move, are important. In the absence of either,
things may not work out.

Important Points to Remember about Trading
Ranged Markets

Sideways markets often have a tendency to reverse every third day. This
isn't a hard and fast rule, but this pattern is frequently observed in
sideways markets. If there is going to be a big move on a given day, the
signs of it may sometimes be visible from the opening itself.
Unless the opening gap is significant, don't expect active players —
remember, the two types of market participants we discussed in Chapter
7 — to get really active. And unless they do, the range may sustain and
the price may fall back into it again. That’s why we say that it takes
bigger gaps to give follow throughs.
In trending markets, the pivot point will either work as a support in an
uptrend or work as a resistance in a downtrend. In a sideways market,
the pivot will keep getting pierced and penetrated, much like an MA line
does. With flat markets, you might have to sell the opening gap up,
which often turns out to be a fake-out rather than a breakout. With
trending markets, you may wait for a decline or consolidation and buy
the gap-ups.
Even the size of the gap is important. Too small a gap may die down
without any follow through, while too big a gap might have already
taken away the best part of the intraday move. Wider pivots will attract
the price towards the central pivot, in which case a bigger amount of
intraday gyration may be available and tradeable on either side, unlike
with narrow pivots. Remember, different types of pivot widths will give
different kinds of pullbacks.
On days when the pivot width is neither very narrow nor very wide, and
is thus not providing you any clear signal, you may get signals from the



morning range.
All these are permutations and combinations. Coming to trade every
morning with a thesis or strategy is important; equally important is to
allow the market to approve or reject that thesis. Nothing works all the
time. So it is important to know when to expect each hypothesis to
work. You can keep alert levels in indices and stocks for yourself, and
allow the market to lead you, rather than trying to lead it. If it behaves
differently from your expectation, you wait and see what’s happening
before jumping in. You cannot come with two biases.

All the above mentioned details will add up to clarify your trades in
sideways markets.

The essential idea is that the system a trader chooses to follow should be
so clearly defined that it covers as many angles and contingencies as
possible. It should throw up entries and exits — you should not be having to
chase them; rather, these must be clearly calling out to you. So it is the
totality of the broader picture, plus the context and the mood of the market
for the day that together must prod a trader into decisions, and not his whim
or fancy. This ability comes from an in-depth study of your system.

Correspondingly, in a trending market you must have clarity about your
navigation using different criterea. Are you going to trail the stop loss? Are
you going to exit at a pre-determined target? How are you pre-deciding that
target? When and how do you expect an end to the intraday move, and thus
tighten your stop loss? As we have learnt, a narrowing range, price
rejections, higher time frame hurdles, etc. are good signs for this.

The closing of a candle at highs or lows is a sign of price acceptance in
that direction, while a long top or bottom is a sign of rejection. We know
how to recognise a tiring out market and loss of momentum, right? Our
effort is to strike a balance between untimely or early exits in a giving
market, and overstaying our welcome in a sideways market. The map
should be well defined, and should be marked clearly with all milestones in
your mind.



Conclusion
Trading only a limited number of securities, meaning staying only with one
or two stocks or indices, when trading sideways markets is as good a
method of trading as any other. If you can master it, you will succeed. More
is not always merrier. Even if you are tracking more than two stocks or
indices, and prefer variety, you must still keep a limit on the total number of
stocks that you actually try to track or trade at a time. Tracking too many
stocks is no guarantee that you will do better. Some of the best traders work
with only limited stocks at any point in time. As the time and the flavour of
the season change, their watch-list gets updated. The selection can be based
on liquidity and volatility. We want stocks with good movements and not
lazy, lethargic and poor movers. Before we conclude, let’s have a look at the
chart in Figure 8.13 for another example of a sideways market trade.

Figure 8.13: Nifty on 7 June 2017. The range had shifted higher compared to the last days of
May, but it still remained sideways. On the day in question, we had RBI policy news and also
the news about discounts expected by clients from IT companies in the second half of the day.

The trades are indicated on the chart.



An ideal F&O trade would consist of Price action plus Location plus
Timing plus Trap plus Catalyst. We have seen the first three factors, and we
will cover the other two as we move ahead. Keep reading. Keep learning.
Keep earning.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 9

OceanofPDF.com



Trading Big News Events

The Catalyst by Your Side

Do you remember the impact on Sun TV’s stock the day when the late
Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa left this world?

Do you recall the big moves in stocks like PVR, the multiplex company,
upon the release of the all-time Indian blockbuster movie, Baahubali?

Do you recall the disastrous moves in Idea and Bharti Airtel telecom
stocks on 1 September 2016 when Reliance announced the launch of its
telecom service Jio? Or, the drop in the ADAG group in May 2017 when
there was a major fall in bond prices and there was a doubt about the
company’s ability to repay the 2020 bonds?

The moral: If you are not on the right side of the affected stocks on such
days, then you will definitely be left behind. That is exactly what this
chapter is all about. As traders, our job is to mint money, no matter who is
born, who expires, who merges with whom, who de-merges from whom,
who will repay their debts, who profits, and who is in deep red.

Let’s see how to use it all to our benefit as traders.

We have already discussed a lot about trade setups, trading tactics, etc. We
will now add one catalyst which can power your trades. Remember what we
said earlier; the higher the number of factors on your side, the bigger your
edge and higher the odds of success? If there are factors beyond the charts
that go in our favour, they can add to our edge.

One such factor is some news or event whether about a stock or the
market in general. Such news or event can work as powerful catalysts for
your trading moves. In effect, a favourable news event can create a



significant tailwind. It can act as a force multiplier behind your trading
move. When there is a news or an event backing a chart setup, there would
be a larger number of players who will be tracking it. When the cumulative
emotion of many market players initiates a move, it will have stronger
momentum behind it. The move may then sustain for more points — and
thus more profits. The news could be a stock specific catalyst, a sector
catalyst, or a macro catalyst impacting the market as a whole. Also, we need
not concern ourselves whether the presumed future positive or negative
outcome may be borne out. We just assess the current emotional impact of
the news or the event, make a profitable trade, and move on.

One must always remember that markets run on emotions and money
flows. News and events impact both. For example, a news tailwind might
ensure that you see enough follow through to any opening gaps. When the
wind is behind you, your move forward will become smoother and easier.
So it is definitely a good thing to have a news event on your side. It makes
sense to focus on the big news of the day or the week and the stocks that are
going to get impacted by it. Such moves may begin right from market
opening and give you entry within the first few minutes itself. Even during
market hours, as fresh news keeps flowing in, you will see big moves in the
impacted stocks. The Reliance Jio AGM on 1 September 2016, for example,
and the news of Indian Army’s surgical strike on Pakistan-based terror
camps in 2016, and many other such events get reported through the day.
You can keep a tab of these through the Internet, live TV, social media, or
any kind of mobile applications.

It takes a great deal of skill, agility and conviction to trade stocks based
on breaking news, but it can be very rewarding. Very often at such times
you may get a candle which is equivalent to two or three days of a normal
move. It can all happen within one day.

You will have to build a solid level of conviction and use a strict risk
management method to make the most of such rapidly unfolding moves.

How to Trade Stocks That Are in the News



Events create emotions. And a trader’s job is to encash these emotions — after he is done
controlling his own.

One of the ways of selecting stocks to trade is a combination of technical
know-how and news events taken together. You zero-in on the best stocks
for the day where you see the highest probability of both being in your
favour.

The concerned news could be a macro event that impacts the larger
picture, the overall market or the major indices. These are the events that
will have a major bearing on the entire economy. It could also concern
micro events that impact specific sectors and stocks.

We will consider several examples to see how daily news events impact
stock prices through the day. Sometimes company specific news can even
result in a spill-over effect on multiple stocks belonging to the same
industry or sector. At other times, the news driven trend may even continue
for several days. Traders who are willing to hold onto their positions
overnight will find this very useful. All of it, however, will begin with a
good day trade. You can then choose to ride the wave for as long as it stays
in your favour.

In the examples that follow, we will also examine how to manage such
trades with the help of our day trading system and trade setup.

We saw a major move in Idea on the day when the news of Idea and
Vodafone merger broke. This stock gave a big intraday move with multiple
opportunities for entry based on our locational strategy and entry signals
using candles. The pivots were surpassed by a huge margin within the first
few minutes. But the story had much more steam left in it. The 20MA line
support provided some entry signals, and every minor pullback was
immediately absorbed. There was a strong larger context as well to this
move. The stock had bottomed out on a higher time frame. Those who were
short in this stock would have immediately felt the fear and the resultant
pressure as the stock kept rising. F&O players often have a sense of urgency



when a position goes against them. Their short covering action thus
provided further boost to the up move. This is exactly how you combine
technicals with emergent news and the larger picture or the overall context.
When a trade is taken keeping the entire overall context in mind, the chance
of its success multiplies. That’s when you get a roaring move. In this case,
the Idea stock opened with a gap and then had a decent follow through. It
immediately took out the highs of the previous few days and went on to rise
28% intraday! You can see this move in the chart in Figure 9.1.

Figure 9.1: What an Idea: the 28% intraday up move in Idea on the day news broke of its
merger with Vodafone.

On 17 February 2017, Reliance Capital announced that it had found a
buyer for its stake in Paytm. The company was planning to focus on its core
businesses by selling off its non-core stuff. It was also planning to soon list
its home finance division. There was also an expectation that some hot-shot
top appointee would join the company. All these factors combined to give a
big intraday move in Reliance Capital, all driven by this news event. By the
month of May, the stock reached around  700 without any midway
corrections. That’s the power of news-driven stock selection.



The move is captured in the intraday chart of Reliance Capital in Figure
9.2.

Figure 9.2: The move in Reliance Capital that could not be capped once the news of its
divestment from Paytm broke.

The stock of Reliance Industries broke out on the higher time frame chart
on 22 February 2017. This was after eight years of consolidation. On that
day it crossed its previous day’s high, its weekly and monthly highs, and
also closed above its 8-year range. The move was triggered by the news of
the imminent start of the commercial operations of its telecom venture, Jio.
If you kept the entire context and the larger picture in mind, you would not
have hesitated in trading the strong momentum evident on this day. Further,
the move was not expected to end in a day. Market veterans as well as the
media were expecting a still higher level in the coming days. The much
awaited breakout was finally here! Have a look at it in the chart in Figure
9.3.



Figure 9.3: Once the news broke of the imminent start of Jio’s commercial operation, this
move in Reliance Industries could be relied upon for a few more days as well. The price rose
10% intraday. And added another 10% within a week; taking it from levels of  1,100 to 

1,300.

Figure 9.4: Another leg of the Reliance Industries up move after news of its upgrade and
revised price targets. When you have such a story on your hand, there’s nothing wrong in

trading the same story till all the juice is squeezed out.



Within a few days, research firms were upgrading the stock and revising
their price targets. The stock continued its journey into the stratosphere on
the morning of 27 February 2017 as well. It was again a very clear intraday
trade. Whatever minor consolidation occurred on the previous day came to
an end and the rally gathered further steam with the stock making newer
highs, exactly as everyone was expecting it to do. This is brought out
clearly in the chart of Reliance for 27 February 2017 in Figure 9.4.

A day trader is expected to remain vigilant about market developments
through the day and take advantage of them. But he must definitely check
his charts before committing to any trade. Such moves will require agility.
Your hand should not tremble, and you must exhibit utmost level of focus
and tight risk management. It’s worth recalling a dialogue here from the
Bollywood classic Sholay:

Jo darr gaya, sahmjo marr gaya — “He who hesitates, perishes,” taunts the supervillain
Gabbar in the Bollywood classic, Sholay.

Let’s now consider another story. On 8 March 2017 there was a sudden
newsbreak during the day about a cut in aviation fuel tax from 25% to 1%.



All aviation stocks rose in a rapid move intraday.
Have a look at the Jet Airways move on its intraday chart in Figure 9.5.

Figure 9.5: Jet Airways takes off immediately on news of aviation fuel tax cut. The trend had
already been up for some days, though it had also recently seen some correction.

Another day, another story. The stock of Maruti was at an all-time high at
the end of January 2017 and it had been performing really well ever since
the market picked up pace after the demonetisation effects had settled
somewhat (see Figure 9.6). On 1 February, the news of the automaker’s
monthly sales numbers was strong enough to put the fear of demonetization
completely to rest. The market had had few expectations of a good
performance from any of the auto companies due to the huge cash crunch
that the entire country had recently faced. In fact, the stock made historic
highs on this day and offered many entries for a day trade. Moreover, the
overall sentiment was also solid during the second half on this day once the
Finance Minister completed reading out his Budget speech. Yes, it was the
Budget day, too. The best moves are seen when most factors are in your
favour. That’s the advantage of keeping the larger context in view. The
stock created history.



Figure 9.6: What a move!!! Maruti makes magical moves and newer highs, creates history on
sales numbers plus budget bonanza, putting to rest the fear of demonetisation. Tightly coiled
moves of the previous days gave a solid breakout. Look also at the power of the mighty 20MA

line.

On 3 March 2017, there was the news of a dip in the production of
sugarcane and the likely resultant deficit in sugar inventory. Indian Sugar
Manufactures Association (ISMA) reported a dip of 18% in sugar
production. This, combined with the ever burgeoning demand for sugar,
proved to be good news for sugar stocks which saw a big surge, as is
illustrated by the chart of Dhampur Sugar in Figure 9.7. The stock had been
in a narrow range during the previous days and, as expected, this news led
to a breakout.



Figure 9.7: Sweet returns for sugar stock players. Sugarcane production dips, sugar deficit
rises, and so does the stock of Dhampur Sugar. This move sustained on the next day as well.

When the technicals and a news event align, you may see turbo-charged
moves, whether up or down, due to the tailwind in your favour.

Spice Jet announced poor quarterly results on the evening of 14 February
2017. The stock broke down from its range of many weeks right from early
morning trade on 15 February. This, combined with a rise in the fuel cost,
signalled pressure on the operating margin. Have a look at Spice Jet’s chart
in Figure 9.8 which illustrates the move.



Figure 9.8: Spice Jet crumbles under the pressure of poor results news plus higher fuel costs.
In fact, this drastic move created a near term bottom.

The Economic Times carried a big headline early morning on 7 February
2017 about Tata Motors. It mentioned the negative impact of the proposed
border tax levy by USA on some companies. The report said the
development could impact the EPS of Tata Motors by as much as 50%,
since US accounted for some 20% of its Jaguar car sales. Adding fuel to the
fire were the low growth numbers of Jaguar in China, Europe and the UK.
The stock price crumbled right from start of the day as depicted in the chart
in Figure 9.9. You can see how our trading system could have given you a
great intraday trade, provided you were aware of the news and had
accordingly put the stock in your watch list for the day. The price started
falling from  524 that day, and declined to  435 over the next few days,
without any pullback on the upside. The move goes on and on. Again, it’s
the power of solid stock selection.



Figure 9.9: Tata Motors faces downward heat arising from news of a proposed US border tax.

Auro Pharma put out its results on 10 February 2017 even as the entire
pharma sector was reeling under pressure that particular morning, leading to
further weakness in all industry stocks. Twice the stock tried to go above
the levels of  713, but failed both times and remained stuck in a sideways
range. The stock and the sector both had been under pressure for a long
time. When you keep this entire context in mind, and then see the way the
stock behaved at the opening, your call for the day would be obvious;
actually, even for many days to come as the chart in Figure 9.10 reveals.



Figure 9.10: Auro Pharma’s intraday chart shows that the stock is not just down, but out as
well. This wasn’t the end, though.

While reviewing this chapter three months later, it was noticed that the
Auro Pharma stock had closed the day at  526. The high of around  705
shown in the chart in Figure 9.10 for 10 February 2017 had not been taken
out on closing basis ever since. In other words, if you were on the wrong
side and didn’t maintain a strict stop loss, three months later you would still
have been paying daily mark-to-market margin (MTM). This again
demonstrates the strength of our stock selection strategy. The stories we
selected in February and March 2017 went on paying off till May 2017. The
chart in Figure 9.10 is the intraday chart of 10 February 2017. The one in
Figure 9.11 is the daily chart of the same stock till 24 May. Have a careful
look at both.



Figure 9.11: Auro Pharma daily chart till 24 May.

Let’s now consider a story from the banking sector. Kotak Mahindra
Bank held a press conference on 29 March 2017 and speculation was rife
that there could be a possible acquisition announcement in order to reduce
the promoter’s stake in the company. Due to its link with the Mahindra
group, M&M Financial was believed to be a probable candidate.
Accordingly, M&M Financial rose very strongly during the day prior to the
conference. Though the stock closed the day lower, but it gave a strong
intraday up move before that. A day trader could have found his stock of the
day here. That’s not the end of the story. In fact, the entire group of NBFCs
did well due to this news and related sentiment. While the news later turned
out to be mere speculation, we are more interested in the resultant trade
opportunity rather than trying to guess the future. So we won’t waste time
arguing whether this was going to be good or bad for the company’s future.
Take a look at the chart in Figure 9.12.



Figure 9.12: M&M Financial was in news due to its rumoured takeover by Kotak Mahindra
Bank. While the stock closed lower, but an intraday trader would have made his profits by

then.

Let’s now cross borders, as we have seen enough of domestic events.
When US President Trump got vociferous about H-1B visa norms in early
2017, Indian IT professionals and Indian IT companies operating in USA
began feeling the heat. This led to major price moves in the sector as
Indians residing in the mighty US felt unsafe and insecure in times to come.

The pensive old Bollywood number comes to mind here: Chal udd ja re
panchi, ki ab yeh desh hua begana — Fly away, bird, this land has turned
inhospitable and alien!

Take a look at the Tech Mahindra daily chart in Figure 9.13. You will
notice the size of the intraday move it made. One such trade in a month can
change the entire look of a trader’s monthly P&L statement.



Figure 9.13: Tech stocks get trumped. Tech Mahindra stock moves from  486 to  425 within
a day. It’s a range bound market, and this was a breakdown from the lower end of the range.

It wasn’t just Tech Mahindra, though. All the Indian IT stocks were under
pressure and you could have picked any of the multiple movers at that time.
Or, you could have even traded the index. See the IT index chart in Figure
9.14.

Figure 9.14: IT Index in the dumps, courtesy President Trump.



On 13 February 2017, Bank of Baroda announced poor quarterly
numbers. The stock fell sharply intraday, right from a morning gap down.
Now if you see the entire context you will easily understand why. By
applying weekly pivots, you will see that the move during the day was
entirely below the weekly pivot. Also, the stock had already moved
significantly higher before the results. Consequently, it was already too far
from its 20MA line on daily charts.

You may be trading the right side of the charts but you should still have a
look at the left side because that’s how you get to grasp the entire context.
Have a look at the charts of Bank of Baroda, both daily chart (Figure 9.15)
and intraday chart (Figure 9.16). The stock kept falling on subsequent days
as well, till it found support at the 200MA line on the daily charts.

Figure 9.15: Daily chart of Bank of Baroda providing the larger picture, and showing the
larger move as well, along with weekly pivots.



Figure 9.16: Here’s the resultant impact on Bank of Baroda brought out by this intraday
chart. It had earlier been flying for many days.

Remember that song in Raj Kapoor’s autobiographical film, Mera Naam Joker — Aye
bhai, zara dekh ke chalo . . . aagey hi nahi pichey bhi . . . daayein hi nahi baayein bhi — Hey

brother, mind your step; look not just upward but down as well, not just left, look right,
too.

Talking of news events and their impact on price charts, how can we
ignore the chart of Bank Nifty on one of the year’s biggest days, the Budget



Day on 1 February 2017. As the budget speech was being read out, the
stock market waited patiently doing nothing very much, checking for
unexpected surprises or shocks. The market was already under pressure post
demonetisation, and was looking forward to some relief. It was keenly
watching if the government woud resort to a politically popular budget or
take the bolder steps required for the economy’s growth. When all seemed
to have gone well, the market made up its mind. As soon as the speech was
over, the market started moving higher as the lack of any bad news was
deemed good news, good enough to trigger a rally! There was a sizeable
breakout from the previous day’s lows in the indices and related stocks post
the finance minster’s budget speech. This is illustrated by the Bank Nifty
chart for the budget day 2017 in Figure 9.17.

Figure 9.17: Massive move!!! Budget bonanza for Bank Nifty on 1 February 2017 due to
favourable Budget news.

Knowing the entire context also tells you when to follow the wellknown
trading adage — buy the rumour, sell the facts. Let us once again take the
example of Idea. Since the news of its possible merger with Vodafone, the
stock had already risen much higher. On the day when the merger was



actually announced, the stock was done and over with the rise and, in fact, it
fell big time from the day’s opening highs. Once it broke the levels of 
106, it was below the low of the entire previous month. A minor pullback
effort was sold into as well. We had even suggested a short trade in this
stock on live television while the move was unfolding real time in the
market. The move did not end with that day’s action but went on and on. By
May 2017, the stock reached levels of  74. Have a look, first at the build-
up before the merger on higher time frame in Figure 9.18, and the intraday
chart of the merger day, 20 March 2017, in Figure 9.19.

Figure 9.18: This daily chart of idea gives the full month’s view, and thus the full context.



Figure 9.19: Buy on rumour, sell on fact is borne out in this intraday chart of Idea. This is a
detailed view for a short trade.

Early in 2017, tyres stocks had been moving higher over many days on
hopes of the government levying anti-dumping duties on imported tyres. As
the time approached for the actual event, the stocks that had already run
ahead started correcting significantly intraday on 28 March. Also, the
market now began to believe that tyre makers did not actually have a strong
case for anti-dumping duty as the price difference between the tyres being
sold by Chinese manufacturers and Indian players was not big enough. As
technical traders, this price reaction was bound to happen. It is like
Newton’s Law, after all. Even if duty had been levied, stocks that were
over-stretched would have corrected anyway (see Figure 9.20). But the
news would definitely tell us when, and that can change the game. We can
make the most of it by trading the stock on the given day. There was
constant discussion on the media about this.



Figure 9.20: Newton’s Law — what goes up, comes down; news plus the chart is what tells us
when and by how much. What more do we want? MRF intraday chart is shown here. The price

fails to rise above R1 and then again fails to rise above the pivot, a clear sign of fall ahead for
the day.

News Based Trading in Context
We do not suggest taking a trade based only on news. What we are
saying is that the greater the number of factors in your favour, higher the
chances of your success. The technicals of the market should, of course,
always be verified before taking a plunge. There will be times when the
news will not make the expected impact on the stock price. That is why you
must see what is happening at the market opening and only then take your
call, and do so always with a strict stop loss.

People who believe in trading stocks that are “hot and happening” should
also keep a watch on the day’s action during market hours. Each day there
will be sectors that will be active. There would also be smaller groups of
stocks belonging to a particular industry group which could be finding
favour with the market. Very often all stocks belonging to the sector of the



day give trades in the same direction. Market scanning will always tell you
about the industries or groups in action.

On a given day there may be high interest among market players in, say,
leather stocks, or in tea stocks, in airlines industry, or in tyre stocks, in
textile stocks, or in sugar stocks. If you keep a close watch on the day’s
action, you will not miss out such moves. All it requires is presence of mind
and quickness in action. If you have done your pre-market preparation in a
proper way, you would also be aware of the higher time frame chart patterns
of these categories. If everything is falling in place simultaneously, you can
expect a magnified move in that stock. Check out the examples in Figures
9.21, 9.22 and 9.23. Each is from the “hot sector” of the particular day.

Figure 9.21: All NBFCs were strong on this day. The intraday chart of Bharat Finance is
shown here. The daily time frame chart of the stock also showed important breakout as on 17

February 2017.



Figure 9.22: This intraday chart of DHFL shows the price move from  300 to  325 within a
few hours; a big move indeed. This was on 17 February 2017. There was sectoral support for

NBFCs, all of whom were moving higher together. By May 2017, DHFL touched  450, without
any interim fall.

Figure 9.23: In March 2017, PNB rose along with all PSU banks after the Finance Minister
spoke in his Budget 2017 speech of some imminent solution to the NPA issue between the banks
and RBI. This sector also demonstrated general sectoral strength; PNB touched  185 by May,
nearly doubling from its end-March level without any midway correction below these levels.



Spill-Over Impact of News on Related Stocks
Very often news relating to a particular company also impacts other stocks
belonging to the same industry group.

For example, because one stock from a sector fared well from
demonetisation, it would be reasonable assume that other stocks belonging
to the same sector may also have been spared from its adverse impact.
Thus, when there were good results from Titan post demonetisation, there
was a big surge in PC Jeweller as well, as you can see from the charts of
these two companies in Figures 9.24 and 9.25, respectively.

Figure 9.24: Its time to shrug off the demonetisation blues, says Titan.



Figure 9.25: See the rub-off effect: the price of PC Jeweller rises in anticipation of lower than
expected adverse impact of demonetisation on jewellery companies, after seeing good results

from Titan.

When Sun TV heaved a sigh of relief in its legal battle, Raj TV rose up
10% for no reason of its own. That’s how this rub-off effect works.

When the market got news of Idea’s merger with Vodafone, we also saw
a big move in Bharti Airtel. Let’s have a look at spill-over impact of news
on related stocks through some real examples.

Bharti saw a big surge on the day the news broke of Idea’s merger with
Vodafone as depicted by the chart in Figure 9.26 which shows how on that
single day the stock moved above the high of the entire month.



Figure 9.26: Bharti Airtel tags along with Idea on the big announcement of the latter’s
impending merger. That’s the sectoral impact of news on related companies.

Figure 9.27: Sectoral rub-off impact: Infosys surges ahead on buyback news in Tech
Mahindra.



Similarly, when there was news of a buyback in Tech Mahindra, even
Infosys saw a big move intraday. The stock opened with a big gap early
morning, and it moved higher after a bit of sideways movement. In the
process, it broke above its previous high and range and stayed above all the
MA lines, as illustrated in Figure 9.27.

Keeping the larger context in view also includes paying closer attention
when a ripe trade setup appears on higher time frame charts. It can give
stronger moves that can go on for more than a day. Have a look at India
Cements in Figure 9.28.

Figure 9.28: This daily chart shows a perfect trade setup in India Cements

How to Read the Market’s Reaction to a News
Event
We have seen many instances and charts where good news leads to an up
move and bad news lead to a down move. Many times, however, markets
also do the opposite. Does this mean that the market is not good at reading



or discounting events? That is not the case; in fact, markets are always
right. Price is the king. Only, we need to learn to interpret it better before
passing judgement. It is not without reason that these things happen. The
reason may be in the context. If the good or bad news is already built into
the price, then it may not move in the expected direction. Instead, you may
see a strong reversal in the other direction; namely, a strong up move after a
bad news break, or a strong down move after good news.

Let us consider two examples and see how and why this happens.
Auro Pharma was hit by bad news in the form of muted results in May 2017
as its products faced pricing pressure in the US and EU markets. Also, the
pharma sector had already been beaten down since long. Post the results,
the stock rose 10% intraday. That reaction from the market was a clear sign
of a negative event already having been priced in. The force of the upward
turn was visible from early morning. We had mentioned on television
during that day’s pre-market analysis that we expected the stock to close in
the green, even if it opened gap down. For an alert trader, this stock should
already have been on the radar. The move gave many entry opportunities
during the day as depicted in the chart in Figure 9.29.

Figure 9.29: Aurobindo Pharma chart shows entry around R1 when it turns into a support
during a pullback. Another few entries around R2 are visible as well.



The next example is that of Jet Airways (see Figure 9.30). The company
announced pathetic quarterly results with its profit nosediving on the back
of low airfares and high fuel costs. But all of it was already priced in and
the stock behaved in a similar way as the earlier example. It did gap down
at the open, only to reverse sharply and close higher for the day as shown in
Figure 9.30. It is not that you will realise this happening only at the end of
the day. The price behaviour will alert you before the opportunity is lost,
provided you know both the context and your stock. As you can see, the
price action on the chart says it all.

Figure 9.30: Jet Airways intraday chart shows that the first trade was available when the
price moved above the first candle, with stop loss below the candle — and a target of  463-

471. The next trade signal appeared when there was a pull-back towards the central pivot
point. It held the pivot, and moved further, even rising above the 20MA and 200MA lines.

Trade entries in Jet Airways were available during the day. The initial
sharp move was a snap back towards the overhead 200MA line which



coincided with R1, after the price grew over-stretched on the downside.
After that, the price started respecting the pivot and the 20MA line. That
was another sign for a long trade. The snap back could be estimated even
from the higher time frame chart, which is shown in Figure 9.31.

Figure 9.31: Triggered by the result, the daily chart of Jet Airways showing the snap back
effort from monthly S2 level towards S1, all within a day.

Even a week later, both these stocks — Auro Pharma and Jet Airways —
were ruling higher from the levels discussed in these charts.

If you have bought a rumour, you sell the fact. If you had sold the rumour, you buy the
fact.

How to Get the Best Out of Business TV
In school and college we are taught about differentiating between facts,
opinions and views. That is one lesson which a trader must use every single
day. It should get deeply ingrained in you; it will help your trades



immensely. If you are an aspiring trader, you will be watching business
news on television on a regular basis. There are also Internet websites and
various mobile applications along with social media that keep bombarding
us with essential as well as useless information. It is crucial that you know
how to separate the wheat from the chaff. Otherwise, you shall simply
confuse yourself — and even damage your trading account.

There will be a large number of television experts and media analysts
doing their own research and presenting large amounts of information on a
daily basis. Your job is to separate facts from opinions and views. You may
want to go by someone’s opinion whom you strongly believe in, but even
that doesn’t mean you ignore the charts. Charts are the distilled view of the
entire market. There’s nothing wrong in listening to opinions as opinions,
but you must also know how to analyse an opinion. An independent trader
would also prefer using facts from the media as triggers for his or her own
analysis and, finally, go by the charts. Of course, one must always check the
larger time context while analysing all such triggers.

Milestones Covered
In this chapter we have discussed intraday trading using events and news as
catalysts. The best trades occur when the news and the technicals join
hands. Nothing in this universe works in isolation, and the same applies to
charts as well. Also, no matter how good a trade setup looks on a particular
chart for a long trade, if there is overnight bad news about it, the trade may
not work out well. It makes sense staying alert to all kinds of market events.

Next we will address one of the major issues faced by traders — traps.
Short term traders often get trapped on the wrong side of the market. With
leverage, the traps get more painful. The next chapter teaches you how not
to get trapped. Not just that, but how to also actually encash situations in
which others are trapped!



OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 10

OceanofPDF.com



How to Profit from Traps

He was an honest police officer. He was loyal, dedicated and hard-working.
Everyone trusted him and he enjoyed great credibility. He always acted
from a level of professional expertise and experience and had a well
balanced mind. He could successfully read the minds of criminals and knew
exactly how to tackle and control them.

In one particular case, however, he reacted emotionally. When he
discovered that his own family had been wiped out by an outlaw, he reacted
impulsively and without any strategy. He went after the killer but took
neither any weapons nor his team along. He failed to read both the
situation and the enemy’s strength. He failed to control his own emotions.
What happened? He got trapped and lost the battle to the sharp, agile and
opportunistic enemy. He got chopped and lost his arms, an irreversible loss
caused by an action that was made without preparation.

An emotionally wrought Thakur is caught unprepared in the Bollywood classic, Sholay



In fact, it was a reaction based on sentiment rather than strategy. He got
himself trapped so quickly and easily, one would say he voluntarily went
ahead and offered himself.

This is the story of Thakur in the bollywood blockbuster, Sholay. The
enemy was the highly popular super-star villain, Gabbar.

Thakur should have realised that capturing the unarmed Gabbar, isolated
and without his gang and weapons, was one thing. Going after Gabbar in
the latter’s territory without a police force or weapons, quite another. As the
challenges differ, the strategies should also be modified. Acting out of
emotion against such a powerful outlaw was an unforgivable crime. He
paid the price.

The situation in the markets keeps changing from hour to hour, and even
minute to minute. If you fail to read and interpret the situation and fail to
strategize and act accordingly, the all-powerful market will chop you out
with ease.

A smart trader should not just keep himself safe, but must also find
opportunities to profit. He should encash from the emotional frailty of
others while keeping his own emotions under control. The day he fails to do
so, he gets trapped. Let us now consider the various situations arising in the
market which trap traders. We will understand how such setups look, and
learn how to trade them.

What is a Trap?
Basically, a trap is a false signal that suggests that the market is moving
in one direction when it is actually going to head in the other.

A chart pattern that suggests that the current uptrend has ended will
inevitably invite participants to come in with shorts. If this signal is false,
they will soon get trapped as the market continues to rise. Conversely, long



players will get trapped when there appears a false signal suggesting
reversal from down to up. Those who enter assuming that they have cracked
a deal at cheaper valuations will be left scratching their heads as the market
continues to fall further. Then, again, there are times when market players
expect the trend to continue, but the trend actually reverses. That is also a
trap situation. At other times, when players are expecting a reversal, the
trend stays put.

All such market traps come with big rewards for those who can read
them correctly, and with bigger punishments for those who don’t. These can
be very powerful moves and can give instantaneous rewards to F&O
players. If you find yourself trapped, and if you go on averaging or praying,
then you are inviting disaster. Markets can be like wild beasts, they can
charge much beyond our imagination. Trying to control a market is a waste
of time, money and energy.

The market can lay its traps in various forms; we will consider each type,
and see how to use them to our benefits.

Trap Trading Technique 1: Ranging Markets
When the market has been moving sideways for a few days, it puts in place
a clear high and low of the range. The best trade one can take at such times
is to play against the boundaries when the price hits any one of the
boundary levels. Traders can go short at the top — and go long from the
lower boundary of the range.

There are times when the market, or the stock concerned, makes an
abortive effort to break through one of the boundaries. If the market fails to
see any follow-through after the breakout, it leads to a breakout failure. Say,
the market tried to break out above the upper boundary and several players
entered long in anticipation of higher levels. Their stop losses would be
either inside or around the boundary. If the price fails to move higher and
instead loiters around or corrects, their stop losses may get triggered. These
players are then trapped by the failed upside breakout. It was a false signal
and they fell prey to it. When the upside breakout fails, and as the trapped



long players dump their holdings, the price may see a free fall and soon
reach the other side of the range.

Conversely, had the market broken down past the lower boundary, some
players might immediately short the market at the breakdown levels. If the
market then immediately sees buyers come in and pull the price back up
higher, those short players would get trapped. When the trapped shorts then
run for cover, the price rises sharply. Thus, failed range breakouts and
breakdowns lead to sharp surges and sudden plunges which create huge fear
and emotions.

When you see such trade setups, you can make a good trade provided
you know how to play it. The reason is very simple. As an F&O player, you
would always want your scrip to fire in your direction as soon as you enter.
Your time horizon is extremely short term, which is why there is a definite
sense of urgency amongst F&O players. Fear is a stronger emotion than
greed and scared bears create bigger upsurges in shorter periods. So, don’t
underestimate the power that traps come with. Similarly, scared bulls create
sharper knock down moves in short time spans. That is how the derivatives
markets work. It takes trapped shorts to take markets sharply higher, and it
takes trapped longs to bring the markets sharply lower.

Stock markets are ruthless and merciless and one person’s loss is
another’s gain. So when you see a failed breakout in one direction in a
range bound market, you can take a trade in the other direction. This is
our Trap Trading Technique 1.

Let us look at some examples of markets with clearly defined boundaries
with failed breakouts immediately leading to big moves on the other side.
Let’s first consider the charts of the two major indices Nifty as well as Bank
Nifty given in Figure 10.1 and Figure 10.2, respectively.



Figure 10.1: Nifty’s chart on the expiry day for March 2017 series shows that it stayed in a
tight range throughout the day. After breaking the lower boundary, it jumped rapidly to the

other end. Rejected lower levels followed by strong bullish candles at the strong location of the
200MA line all combine to make things clear. The same thing happens again at the top end, and

Nifty falls rapidly to the lower end. It rises again, and this time it breaks above the earlier
highs.

Figure 10.2: Bank Nifty chart clearly shows the impact of traps. Bank Nifty breaks below the
low of the entire day, after having stayed in a tight range through the day. The mood of the



participants soon saw a swing and it immediately turns super bullish. Again, we have a
combination here of multiple factors, including rejection candles, followed by a giant green
candle. This combination is present at the strong location of 200MA, and it appears at an

important time in the second half of market hours.

Let us consider one more example of Bank Nifty which is shown in
Figure 10.3; again, it is a ranging market.

Figure 10.3: Another example of classic traps in range bound markets. Look at how a
temporary piercing of boundaries with no follow through leads Bank Nifty to the other end of

the range. Also note a break above R1 and morning high which doesn’t sustain.

The next chart of Nifty in Figure 10.4 shows a failed breakout leading to
a breakdown. That did not, however, mean a downtrend. Therefore, those
who shorted Nifty and refused to change their opinions in line with the
changing chart got trapped on the other side of the market later in the day
when the index respected the lower boundary and went higher in the second
half. Shorts should have booked out when the lower boundary got
respected.



Figure 10.4: On 13 February 2017, Nifty tries to rise right at the open but even the early
morning momentum fails to take it above the earlier range, spelling doom for the longs.

All these traps and the resultant trades are a part of Trap Trading
Technique 1. Index traders must study these charts very closely because
indices remain within ranges very often.

Trade plays such as these keep occurring so long as the index or the scrip
stays range bound. Basically, breakthrough rejection at one end leads to a
rapid move to the other end of the range due to the fear factor.

This type of a trap, where markets try to go higher or lower but fail to
decisively cross the range boundaries is particularly common in Nifty and
Bank Nifty. Consequently, an understanding of this trap is very important
for you if you are an index trader. Indices have a high tendency of getting
into, and staying within, a range every now and then. They may often
threaten to break out but end up staying within the range for far longer than
we may think. Also, there can be several failed attempts before an actual
breakout occurs.

You can trade profitably using this technique. All the other trading
techniques that we will discuss in this chapter should also be useful to those



who prefer to trade only a limited number of stocks, say two or three,
throughout the year.

Fear creates panicked reactions among those who are trapped. It provides
an opportunity to cheer for savvy traders, for those who know how to play
the game. The chart in Figure 10.5 illustrates the same trap in the case of
the Tata Motors stock.

Figure 10.5: Excellent intraday trading opportunities on both sides in a range bound Tata
Motors. The day begins with a long entry from the bottom of the range, where a gap down

gives a good entry. There is a clear rejection of this up move in the second half of the day —
and that gives another trade, this time on the short side as shown. Many might have got

trapped assuming it to be a genuine breakout above the upper end of the range. A flat MA line
confirms the sideways move. The stock moves to the lower end again before 3:30 P.M.

Trap Trading Technique 2: Correction Ends and
the Trend Resumes



The scorching summer days of 7 April and 10 April 2017 saw the Nifty fall
rapidly from around 9,280 to 9,180. At that time, many might have thought
that it was hot enough to start using shorts (pun intended)! But the market
wasn’t having any of it and changed its mind. It went higher, again trapping
those who could not see the trap — and those who did not read this book!

The uttar (answer) that the Modi government gave to the entire desh
(country) by its landslide victory in Uttar Pradesh elections in mid-March
2017 had started the run that was not going to stop so easily. So the thing to
do was to stay with the trend till it stayed with you. Midway corrections like
the one mentioned above shouldn’t be taken as a change of trend, and one
must stay alert to any signs of trend resumption and be thankful for a lower
level entry. Those who failed to read this on the charts were the ones who
got trapped.

Well, all the traps may not necessarily arise from a sideways range. In
April 2017, for example, the market had been surging higher and it was
clearly a trending period as can be see in Figure 10.6. After a minor
correction in the previous two days, Nifty opened gap down early morning
on 7 April, and went even lower as well. It then found support at an
important location and resumed its move. When you look left, and trade
right, you will really trade right. Always also focus on the context or the
larger picture.



Figure 10.6: Nifty opens lower but soon changes its mind after a temporary piercing of the
previous day’s low, marking the end of the correction for the day, and the resumption of the

uptrend. As intraday traders, we are interested in today’s action. If you understood what was
happening, you would go long and earn from those who got trapped. If not, you get hunted by
those who do. Please note how viciously the price breaks above the overhead 200MA line at the

third attempt.

Markets opened gap down but that turned out to be a buying opportunity
— look at the sharp surge after that.

The lower low put an abrupt end to the ongoing correction in an
uptrending Nifty, ending the counter trend move and the uptrend resumes.
We also knew that Bank Nifty had stayed stronger even while Nifty
corrected, so there was again support from there. Such an analysis increases
your conviction. This situation, wherein the counter trend move ends in a
trap and the earlier trend then resumes, leads to our Trap Trading Technique
2. If you fail to see the resumption of the trend, you will keep entering on
the wrong side, and keep getting trapped in the process. This trade is
described in Figure 10.6 and Figure 10.7.

Figure 10.7: The same move as in Figure 10.6, shown here with reference to the previous
days. Nifty’s level of 9,200 had strong support, the level where the counter trend ended and the



main uptrend resumed, trapping the shorts.

Such moves happen in individual stocks as well and provide excellent
intraday trading opportunities to the alert trader. The next few examples
focus on individual stocks (see Figures 10.8, 10.9 and 10.10).

Figure 10.8: Bharat Forge forms lower lows in the early part of the day, which puts an end to
the ongoing correction from the previous day in an otherwise uptrending stock. The uptrend

resumes later and gives a sharp surge.

You get trapped if you fail to understand the changing landscape, and if
you refuse to accept or acknowledge the prior trend’s resumption.

An example of MRF Tyres is next in line (see Figure 10.9). One strong day
of counter trend move, another lower opening, and the buyers eagerly
return. We often wait for lower prices to enter a strong uptrend. We often



wait for corrections as well but when one finally appears, we often shy
away from buying. Can you relate to this from your own experience? Think
about it; what’s the point of waiting for a correction then? You must learn to
understand the market better, be thankful of those lower levels, and learn to
make a quick buck as the trend resumes.

Figure: 10.9: MRF Tyres forms a lower low which doesn’t sustain, and the uptrend soon
resumes.

A similar move was seen in Apollo Tyres (see Figure 10.10) on 28 and 29
March 2017. This was caused by the previous day’s shorts which provided
the fuel required to get a sharp surge when the shorts found no follow
through. And that’s precisely what we are interested in. Just a day of
correction and the trend is on again. We are interested not just in staying
away from traps but also in making money from people who get trapped,
right?



Figure 10.10: Apollo Tyres regains the uptrend after a sharp correction with an equally smart
resumption the very next morning. The gap down opening soon finds support. It takes

flexibility and agility to stay away from getting trapped in these moves.

The presence of shorts can be noted either from rejection candles, or even
from large green candles that take out large red candles. The appearance of
such candles should ring a bell. And when you combine these with the
location, timing and the context, then you get to catch the right moves. A
large candle that fails to see a follow through and instead sees an opposite
coloured large candle could well be a trap.

Here are the right ways to save yourself from traps and actually profit from them:

Keeping an eye on the larger picture, or the bigger context.
Staying humble, flexible and nimble.
And accepting the market as the master.

Many times the corrective moves that go on for more than a day or two
can mislead you into believing that the trend has changed. But as the price
approaches support levels on higher time frames, such moves have a strong



chance of resumption. If you have done your pre-market preparation well,
you should be able to immediately notice it in real time as it happens. If not,
then you may remain biased on the wrong side, especially under the
pressure of running markets. That is why prior preparation is absolute
necessary.

The next few examples focus on individual stocks along with their larger
time frame picture. You can see how, almost magically, the price moves in
all the examples. Do study these charts and examples closely.

Looking at the context will help you understand why you saw a sharp surge
in Jet Airways (see Figure 10.11).

Figure 10.11: After a correction on the previous day, the Jet Airways stock soon finds support
as lower prices get rejected, and there you go . . . zip, zap, zoom!!

Now let’s again have a look at the Jet Airways chart in Figure 10.12.



Figure 10.12: The daily chart of Jet Airways tells you that you must go long and exit shorts, if
any, as the price bounces back up from the previous close.

Now let’s have a look at the charts of Sun TV in Figures 10.13 and 10.14.

Figure 10.13: A sharp surge in Sun TV intraday, rejection of the lower level after a three-day
fall and the trend resumes. Those who got in last and refused to accept what the market tried to

say, got trapped.



Figure 10.14: A glance at the higher time frame daily chart of Sun TV would have told you to
be ready if you intended to trade the scrip long. The setup looked solid.

In addition to the rejection candle and the strong trending bar, there is
another method of recognising a trap being laid. When you see a strong
counter trend bar, start following it closely. If the trend is say, up, watch out
for the appearance of a red candle. If the candle after the red candle makes a
lower low but fails to close at the lower end and instead closes green, that
should ring an alarm bell. This forms the setup. It may not have a large
body or a long tail, but that is fine. This second candle is the setup candle.
Now, if the third candle also makes a move in the direction of the trend
which is up, then it is time to enter in that direction. See the example of
Ceat Tyres chart in Figure 10.15.



Figure 10.15: This daily chart of Ceat Tyres shows the technique just explained. The ongoing
uptrend is halted and reversed by the big red Candle 1. Candle 2 then goes lower but closes
higher, and is a green candle. Candle 3 is again a green candle and closes still higher. This

marks the resumption of the original uptrend. You enter at Candle 3. If you are aware of these
behavioural patterns of the market, you can encash them even as others get trapped.

The chart in Figure 10.16 shows how the correction in Dish TV stops at
the limit of 50%, and the original trend then resumes. If you have done your
homework, you can earn from this kind of a move. If not, you get trapped.
Have a look at the wonderful intraday opportunity arising for the alert
trader. Also review the higher time frame chart of Dish TV in Figure 10.17,
which tells you what is going on as Dish TV dishes out good intraday
returns.



Figure 10.16: Dish TV dishes out a superb intraday move.

Figure 10.17: The higher time frame daily chart of Dish TV shows how support comes in at
around 50% correction level of the previous upsurge. Remember our 50% rule? The trend then

sustains itself. These are the various ways in which a trend resumes, the correction ends, and
there appear traps for those who don’t read good books!



Next, let’s consider the example of Escorts. A strong uptrend faces a
midway correction for 3 to 4 days, which ends exactly at a strong support
level from where the trend fires up again. Have a look at both the intraday
chart in Fig-ure 10.18 and the setup on the higher time frame daily chart in
Figure 10.19.

Figure 10.18: This is the intraday chart of Escorts. Look how the previous lows are sustained
and the stock fires up in top gear after a rejection of the lower levels.



Figure 10.19: Escorts on daily chart. The counter trend ends at the 20MA line and the strong
uptrend resumes. Perfect setup.

Trap Trading Technique 3: Trend Ends,
Correction Begins
If you enter a trade far away from the MA lines, and hold on stubbornly
even when the price reverses then you contribute to wealth building — not
yours, but of others.

Many times trends that run too hard and too fast may end as a trap, and
that usually occurs during the last leg of a move. The participants who enter
late and stay in stubborn may end up holding the baby. Thus, if you entered
last and if you refuse to bend, then you are the one who is trapped. Stay
cautious, or pay the price.

Have a look at the chart in Figure 10.20. The fall in Delta Corp began
from around  200 in April, and by the end of May it touched levels of 
140, that’s a full 25% erosion.



Figure 10.20: Delta Corp’s daily chart shows the price extending far above the MA line to
about  220. Those who bought at those higher levels were trapped when the price turned lower

from there. Prices fell all the way to about  140- 150 by the end of May.

The chart in Figure 10.21 is Delta Corp’s intraday chart, which shows
one of the ways in which an ongoing trend gets temporarily countered. If
the trader fails to see this halt, he gets trapped. This halt can come about in
various other ways as well:

It can happen with the market opening with an upside gap that
eventually works as a final blow out. The trend then immediately
reverses and the scrip closes lower that very day.
Or, it can also come about by way of giant candles that lead to the final
leg of the move during the day, post which the trend begins to correct.
This may lead to the formation of a top tail.

The event is the same; its unfolding may reveal itself in various ways. A
trader should be able to recognise it as it unfolds so that he can save himself
from any trap. And even profit from it!



Figure 10.21: On 5 April 2017, Delta Corp got hammered down after an unsuccessful struggle
to rise in the first half of the day. The price fell from  218 to  202 within the day. If you were
among those trapped by the price move in Figure 10.20, you proved to be a generous donor for

others!

What is important is the location and the context. When you combine all
the factors, that’s when you catch the right moves and avoid the wrong
ones. Let’s consider the chart of Nifty Bank in Figure 10.22. This up move
had been going on for many weeks. A smart trader having a finger on the
market’s pulse will definitely get the feel as and when the move ends. He
can recognise the final surge and can exit before the price reverses.

Figure 10.22: After a major move over several previous days, an additional gap up is
normally a bonus. Post that, if the scrip starts loitering around, as is the case in this chart of

Nifty Bank, it makes sense to book out. You can re-enter later, if warranted.

Of course, trap trading won’t always work. Nothing ever does. There will
be times when the markets will keep trapping players on both sides. There’s



nothing to be done at such times except stepping aside fast. Or, you look for
trade opportunities elsewhere.

The chart of GAIL in Figure 10.23 shows traps on both sides. It is futile
to try to make money in such a situation. You will keep getting chopped
either way.

Figure 10.23: GAIL made a futile attempt to breakdown earlier in the day. It then makes
equally futile attempts to rise. But equal number of red bars with long top tails would scare any

player — and trap many.

Is it Wise to Buy after a Significant Decline?

Often when a stock falls sharply, traders feel shy of buying it even after
strong signals and signs of trend resumption. Should one ignore and forget
these trades? Or, are there significant opportunities in such situations? Thus,
should one buy or not after big falls? This is an issue traders face almost
daily.

Here is our take:



1. Yes you can buy after a significant decline, and there are methods of
doing so profitably. Once you know those methods, you can get better
entries with bigger corrections. Those could then become entries with
lower risk and higher reward.

2. Nothing works all the time, so don’t forget to maintain stops just like
with any other strategy.

3. What we are trying to do while buying after deep cuts is being on the
same side as the big institutions. The big boys will not buy at highs,
they will always buy from deep support levels.

4. These supports could be moving average lines of longer durations, like
50MA or 200MA. Locations and entry events are very crucial and
without a strong locational support, you must not buy just because there
has been a correction.

5. You must also ensure that you are not entering alone. This can be done
when you buy only with a huge turnaround candle. Remember, the giant
candles of XXL size? Those are ones you must look for. This is crucial
since such candles signify a major sentiment reversal. We are not
interested in marginal bars because they don’t exhibit strong reversals.
Only the big ones do that. This big candle could be enveloping multiple
previous candles on its left side on the chart.

6. Your stop loss should be below such a candle and your target should be
multiple candles above it.

7. With this method the losses will remain limited to one candle but when
you succeed, the winning trade will give you multiple candles. And
that’s what ultimately makes you a winner. If your system, or any
system for that matter, fails twice or thrice, you have to dump it.
Nothing works every time and if you keep looking for “perfect”
systems, you are destined for a lifelong search! This game is such that
you must always be prepared for some losing bets.

8. These strategies can give not just a day trade but a trade that may work
for even longer.

9. You can choose to exit when the move reaches a resistance overhead.
10. We are not in any way suggesting you buy while a stock is falling. It is

about buying when it turns. That’s different.
11. This setup has high chances of getting the shorts trapped. That’s what

we want, right? The trapped shorts can work as a fuel to fire the futures
in your direction with full fervour.



Now, an interesting related question. Do institutions prefer buying
from supports or is their strategy more inclined towards buying
breakouts? The answer might startle you: Institutions don’t look at
chart patterns, they create chart patterns.

But we definitely need to look at charts. Let’s consider the charts of Bajaj
Finance in Figure 10.24 and Figure 10.25 which illustrate how to buy after
deep falls in the manner that we just explained above.

Figure 10.24: This intraday chart of Bajaj Finance shows where to buy after the giant bullish
bar subsequent to a multi-day fall. In the next ten days, the price crosses above  1,360 levels

from about  1,200 levels.

The daily chart of Bajaj Finance in Figure 10.25 shows the context on a
higher time frame. It shows buying coming in after a significant fall.



Figure 10.25: The daily chart of Bajaj Finance showing buying after a deep correction
pushing the price significantly higher.

Milestones Covered
In this chapter, we have seen how to trade three types of traps:

The first type of trap occurs when there are false breakouts and
breakdowns in range bound markets.
The second type of trap occurs when counter trend moves end, and the
original trend resumes.
The third type of trap springs when a trend ends, and the correction
begins.

Well, patterns like what we described in the chart of GAIL (Figure
10.23), with traps on both sides, will also occur. Not all trap trading will
work. Nevertheless, it helps to understand traps and learn trap trading.
Traps are there lurking in the market all the time. Institutions and bigger
players are perfectly capable of pushing prices in a way that can trap retail



players. They often push orders in one direction, only to immediately
reverse the game. They can create and counter huge candles.

Institutions and big players can easily manipulate novice traders and their
stop losses and trigger their orders — and then take the markets on the other
side. These big bulls and bears are always ready to trap the small players
who show a lack of will to learn and exude ego. Learning these patterns can
equip you to play in the direction of the institutions, instead of playing
head-on against them, allowing them to trap and mutilate you.

Sometimes moves from one end to the other end of a range happen with a
huge amount of thrust and big candles. At such times it often appears that
we are going to break all boundaries and rush outside the range and keep
going further. Actually, nothing of the sort happens and the boundaries
remain sustained. Herd mentality can trick you into assuming that a new
trend has begun. But after grasping this chapter, you should be able to
maintain calm and assess if a breakout is real. This mistake happens more
often when the range is reasonably wide. And by the time the scrip reaches
the extreme, it may already be exhausted, thus giving no further move.

Markets spend longer time in trading ranges than in trending phases.
Markets often push too hard in both directions during range-bound days,
and this can easily lead to an illusion of a breakout. Which is why traps
appear very often. Only a good grasp of the nature and types of traps can
save you from getting trapped. If you are into index trading, or if you prefer
trading only a limited number of stocks, then it is imperative that you know
how to trade more and more types of situations that will keep appearing in
those limited number of charts.

You will often hear the market truism, “Buy low, sell high.” But should
one always do so? No, not at all. A green candle in a strong downtrend
could be an attempt to shake out weaker hands. Buying in such cases
without a proper understanding is a perfect recipe for disaster. Many traders
who fall prey to such a trap, may go on averaging — thereafter all they can
do is to go on praying. Sounds familiar?

Writers at Work



Rachana Vaidya: Sir, Sometimes it takes so long for a breakout to occur, and then the breakout
fails. All the patience shown over days goes in vain.

Ashwani Gujral: True. Sometimes even I am left wondering at the market’s capricious nature,
but then who are we to judge the market. Anything can happen here. So, learn to live with the
reality that everything can’t be known in advance. Hunting a lion involves tracking its pugmarks.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 11

OceanofPDF.com



The Trading Power of Confluence

To Indians, and Hindus in particular, the Sangam at Allahabad is a
particularly holy and special place. Here the rivers Ganga, Yamuna and
Saraswati merge into one. This confluence of north India’s rivers is a place
of special pilgrimage for Hindus. Similarly, wherever the various
tributaries join the holy river Ganga as it flows down the Himalayas, the
respective confluences are considered auspicious spots. Much in the same
way, any confluence of mutually reinforcing or mutually supportive factors
can provide a power boost to stock market moves.

What is a Stock Market Confluence?
In this chapter, we will look at how the various factors combine either in
favour of, or against, a particular move — and how that creates a huge
impact on the stock’s price movement. With the magnified impact of
multiple factors, and a confluence of key levels significant, a short term
trader’s journey becomes much easier and smoother. At such a confluence,
the stock may fire up or down more smoothly — and the run may also be
much longer.

A confluence of factors is said to occur when more than one tool, or
more than one time frame chart, show nearly the same price levels as
being key areas of support or resistance. When nearly the same price
levels are seen as key areas, the strength of those levels gets hugely
magnified. If those levels hold, any resultant move starting from there may
really be a big one. Should those levels be broken, on the other hand, the
results could be equally shattering. In case the levels are emerging from
varying time frames, as well as from various tools, that’s still better because



then it’s an even stronger confluence. So there can be a confluence of
multiple tools, of multiple time frames, between news events and candle
patterns, or between locations and events, etc.

Say, the moving averages and pivots show resistance at a similar level.
Or, say, intraday pivots and weekly or monthly pivots show support at
similar levels. In either case, you can expect more action or participation
from around those levels. If you are lucky, you may also get the backing of
a news event that acts as a catalyst and adds to the significance of those
levels; that, then, is icing on the cake. You may often get to see rocketing
moves from such levels, and at such times. In trading parlance, that’s the
time to go full throttle and make the most of the opportunities on offer.

Undoubtedly, there is charisma to confluence, and added energy in the
synergy of factors.

Parameters to be Considered while Studying
Confluence
It is important to understand that a confluence does not mean that two levels
thrown up by two different tools, or two different time frames, have to
exactly coincide. If that happens, so be it. It should suffice even if the two
levels are close enough within a tight zone. Remember, supports and
resistances are zones, and not exact levels.

Another important point is that the various tools throwing up the same
levels should be measuring different parameters. In other words, one must
look at tools that use different formulae to calculate these levels. If all of
them use similar formulae and/or data points, then their throwing up the
same numbers is without much significance.

Equally, a favourable confluence of multiple factors does not imply that
you jump into the deep waters without waiting for the appropriate entry
trigger, namely an appropriate candle pattern, or without your life jacket,
i.e. without stop losses. No matter how strong a signal is, we must continue
to follow the rules of the trade. We must also always adhere to our rules of



money management and position sizing. Going full throttle doesn’t mean
trying to swallow more than what you can digest, or what your account size
permits you to trade. Yes, there could be minor leeway here and there but
there is no question of breaking the boundaries of permissible volumes to
trade. We will learn more on money management and position size in
Chapter 12.

We will be looking at multiple parameters that combine to create a
confluence. Of course, not all of these may necessarily combine in every
single chart but when most of these parameters combine in our favour, we
can look forward to a Muhammad Ali punch!

Your success will also depend on your ability to filter out the noise.
When one looks at so many factors on multiple charts, it’s easy to get
baffled by the contradictory bullish and bearish signs thrown up by various
time frames. The more time you spend studying how all these factors
combine simultaneously, the better you become in using them with each
passing day.

If you are totally new to pivots, it may be useful to first focus on intraday
pivots, and only then start using pivots on multiple time frames, along with
other multiple factors. Good things take time. And short cuts can cut you
short as Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in one of his speeches. Give it
time, before expecting it to give you profits.

Another important point is that a trader must focus on entry signals that
appear at highly significant locations. Always remember that the location
comes first, and only then comes the entry signal by way of candle
patterns. If you do not follow this priority, then your trading results are
likely to be random.

Our confluence study will consist of the following parameters:



Floor pivots and moving averages.
Swing pivots and range highs / lows, etc.
We will also use daily, weekly and monthly floor pivots.
We will use 8, 20, 50 and 200 moving average lines.
In addition, we will use multiple time frame charts, including daily
charts, 5-minute, 15-minute, and 60-minute charts.
The confluence of fundamental news events and technical chart patterns
and levels. Sometimes the news might not relate to the specific scrip of
your interest but may concern an entire sector that is buzzing with
activity. The spill-over effect of some news in one scrip may well fuel a
rally in some other scrips belonging to the same sector. This can tell us
where to look for a strong move. And that’s what matters.
We will also keep an eye on the initial balance or the morning range that
we have earlier discussed. The highs and the lows of these ranges are
crucial levels as well.
As we’ve learnt, the previous day’s close is also an important level to
watch.
We will keep in mind the overall trend as well. We know that moves
starting in the direction of the trend have higher odds of success.
We must, of course, keep the context in mind before taking a plunge.
The expected move must be studied in the context of the price action
that has been built up over the last few days, or even weeks.
While looking at the context, you can also look at the multi-day pivot
relationships discussed earlier.

Let us now consider several real-life examples, and see how each of them
worked out. Let us unravel the power of the power zones created by
confluences.

The Era of RERA

The Real Estate Regulation Act (RERA) is an effort to ban the bandit-like
behaviour of builders, and to protect home buyers from their bullying.

On 3 May 2017, back from a long market weekend, we were all geared
up and charged up to welcome the new era of RERA, that kicked in from 1
May. The new legislation RERA brought along a ray of hope for all home



seekers, and a warning signal for defaulting builders. While it would take
some time before we get to see the impact of any change, RERA’s impact
was already visible on D-street since many weeks. The real estate sector
was buzzing with great expectations and so were the charts of real estate
stocks. Each day brought multiple trading opportunities to choose from.
When this sectoral strength, and the catalyst of the RERA news event
combined on the charts, we expectedly got a strong intraday move. Of
course, its goes without saying that we will trade only the volume that’s
permitted by our account size and we pull the trigger only when the entry
signal appears in our time frame of trading.

Let’s consider the two charts of Sobha in Figures 11.1 and 11.2. One of
them is the daily chart showing the weekly floor pivot levels and the MA
lines. The other is the intraday chart with daily floor pivot levels and other
tools like MA lines.

The chart in Figure 11.1 shows that the stock is in a clear uptrend. At the
end of April 2017, it completed five days of correction and resumed its
uptrend from exactly a rising 20MA line. By itself, this is a very solid trade
setup parameter. RERA became effective from 1 May. That added to the
overall bullishness in the real estate sector. The trade setup was already ripe
for a big up move and the price duly started moving higher on 2 May, as
indicated on the chart by the first of the two big green candles. The move
took the stock above the weekly pivot and it closed near the weekly R1 of 
395 on Day 1. So this level of around  395 now also becomes the closing
price for the day.



Figure 11.1: This is the daily chart of Sobha showing 20MA and 200 MA lines, along with
weekly pivot levels. The last two big green candles towards the right end of the chart show the
first two trading days of May 2017 when the uptrend resumed after 5 days of correction that

took place at the end of April.

Let us now look at what happened the next day through the intraday chart
for 3 May in Figure 11.2. The chart shown here is a 15-minute intraday
chart with 20MA, 50MA, 200MA lines and intraday floor pivots displayed.
For the sake of reference and better understanding, it also shows the
previous day’s move.



Figure 11.2: Intraday 15-minute chart of Sobha for 3 May 2017. The price rises from higher
time frame support, and closes at the high of the previous day. The second leg of the move takes

place after consolidation the next morning.

The stock consolidates for a good part of the day, a healthy sign after the
previous day’s strong move. But the price doesn’t yield and the move
remains sideways, showing that all the selling is getting absorbed. On this
day, too, the entire real estate sector was abuzz. The previous day the price
had closed in the upper end of the day’s range. On the day in question, i.e. 3
May, the price action stayed above the day’s pivot. Both these factors point
to strength. As the price moves sideways, it also catches up with the 20MA
line, and even the 50MA line. Also, this happens exactly around the
previous closing level of  395, which is also the weekly pivot level as
noted above. The trade setup again looks perfect for another leg of up
move. Sure enough, the stock fires up 6% in the second half. As it moves
above  403, which was the level around where it had consolidated the
previous day, it picks up more pace. As it rises above the weekly R1, the
next target on the daily chart and weekly pivots would be around  420 (as
shown in the chart), and that’s exactly where the stock ended the second
day of its up move.



Isn’t it magical? If this doesn’t mesmerise you, then perhaps trading itself
doesn’t excite you.

Let’s now review the power drivers in this trade. The confluence here is
of a news event, plus the context of the previous few weeks, plus sectoral
strength, the higher time frame MA support, the higher time frame pivot
support, the previous day’s close at the top end of the range, and the
intraday pivot on Day 2. The more positives there are to a move, the merrier
it is for us. At such times you can go full volume and make the most of a
benevolent market. Basically, when you get a synergy of more and more
factors capable of creating a high impact, that’s the time you can expect to
see amplified moves.

The best way to trade is by being ready every morning with a background
check on the markets as well as your favourite stocks. Study them, and
arrive at your own views. Always come in to trade with a thesis, and then
see whether the market approves or rejects your thesis. Be willing to take
the market’s word as final, over and above your own opinion.

The Pharma Sector and the Mighty USA

The next is an example of the pharma company Lupin will help us
understand the impact of a confluence of factors with a downward bias and
a falling price. Have a look at the daily chart of Lupin in Figure 11.3 which
contains monthly pivots and 20MA and 200MA lines. Seeing this larger
time frame chart will establish our perspective, and we will be in a better
situation to know what to expect.



Figure 11.3: Daily chart of Lupin shows the stock in a well-defined downtrend. The overhead
resistance of a flat 200MA line hovers right above the price, blocking any effort of the price to

rise above it. Can you see that long top tail in the middle of the chart?

The entire pharma sector had been slack and had long been reeling under
the US FDA and President Trump’s pressure. Added to that was the strength
of the rupee, troubling for companies having large foreign exposure. The
last candle on the right side of the chart is for 24 April 2017, and that’s the
one we are analysing. The earlier price action shows that despite making
two attempts the stock had not been able to cross above the monthly pivot
level of about  1,460. The stock is also below the 20MA line and that’s
definitely bearish. The price level of  1,400 was earlier touched in
November and December 2016 when the stock found support there. So that
multi-month low is now very crucial and any break below it would signal
further trouble. That level also happens to be the S2 level with monthly
pivots. If broken, it hints towards S3 as the next support which is around 
1,366, a good 40 points lower. We can expect more weakness if that too gets
taken down.



Now let us see what happens on Lupin’s 15-minute intraday chart on 24
April (see Figure 11.4). The stock was also in focus for news about the
company’s Goa plant while the sector was in focus due to the use of generic
drug names and other regulatory issues along with a debate over the
expected quarterly results as well. Thus the entire sector was weak on that
given day and that works to our advantage.

Figure 11.4: Intraday 15-minute chart of Lupin. You will note that the level of  1,395 also
happens to be the weekly S1, below which, as we know, the trend should be considered weak.
As you can see that level was taken down right at the start of the day. A minor effort to pull

back after the first big red candle seems to be going in vain. The first candle itself was a strong
candle, and one would definitely expect more red ahead. In fact, the stock pretty soon gives up
S2 as well. It soon reaches the monthly pivot of around  1,360 discussed earlier and closed the

day around there. The move clearly shows how a multi-day low getting broken early gives a
bearish sign for the remaining day. It may even signal weakness for many more days to come.

If you try to decompose this chart further, say into 5-minute time frame,
you can get many more locations for entry. The move from  1,380 to 
1,360 was a clear fall, and it offered a good trade even if you entered later
in the day. The stock achieved the target which was S3 on monthly as well
as weekly pivots. This was a confluence of sectoral weakness plus pivots
over various time frames and the MA line along with a breakdown from a



range that was built over multiple months. Clearly, thus, the move was an
amplified one. Such moves don’t generally die down soon. Nothing is
accomplished in one candle as we have learnt earlier, remember? By May
end, this stock was at levels around  1,100, as Lupin’s daily chart in Figure
11.5 shows.

Figure 11.5: The daily chart of Lupin from November 2016; the last candle on the extreme
right is of 26 May 2017.

The Indian pharma sector absolutely refused to rise all through the Nifty
up move in 2017, and that continued even on the above mentioned date, 26
May 2017, when Sensex hit 31,000 and Nifty touched 9,600. Even amidst
all this euphoria, Lupin was down by 2%. Strong trends don’t reverse that
easily, that’s the point to keep in mind.

Trading on D-Street During the Earnings Season

The next example is from another sector in boom. Through 2017, as the
expectations of green shoots in the economy kept making news every day,
the infra and related stocks, such as cement, remained hot favourites.
Whether the economy was actually seeing green shoots and starting to grow



is not our concern here. The point is that if a trending stock also gets the
support of good quarterly numbers, then that acts as a catalyst, the icing on
the cake.

Let us now consider the example of a premier cement maker ACC and
check out how strongly it cemented its relationships with the bulls in an
earnings season. The results were good and the stock also received upgrades
from rating houses. It also had the advantage of a low volume base, and the
numbers fuelled the vision of an infra-rich India in the coming times. Have
a look at ACC’s intraday chart in Figure 11.6. It has plotted on it the 20MA
and 200MA lines and daily pivots as well.

Figure 11.6: Intraday chart of ACC for 24 April 2017. R1 is around  1,510, R2 around 
1,525 and R3 around  1,540. The stock opens strongly with a gap up and closes at the higher
end of its range. The first candle itself is an XXL giant sized bullish candle. The next candle,

though a red one, doesn’t break below 50% of the previous green one. That assures us that the
bulls are here to stay, and won’t give up. The very next candle was again strong. One could

have entered as the initial high gets taken out. That means there’s more to go in this move. One
could have entered later in the day as well, as shown in the chart.

The larger time frame context would have revealed another very
important factor. As the stock opened with a gap up and moved higher, it
also crossed above the high of the last 60 days or so. Also, it had just



crossed above the 200MA line on the higher time frame (daily) chart. That
was a solid signal for a sharp surge in price some time in the near future, as
soon as it finds a reason to do so. The company results worked as the much
needed booster and propelled the stock like a rocket, the price rising higher
by some 8% to 10% intraday.

If you really want to make big money, you have to do more than what
other traders do. The effort is entirely worthwhile when you see
commensurate results, no matter even if you are a small trader. Remember
Baahubali’s words in the eponymous blockbuster:

Says Baahubali (the strong-armed) “Agar soch pakki hai, toh ek chota sa tinkaa bhi talvaar
ban sakta hai — If your resolve is steely, even a reed will work as a sword.”

Now let’s have a look at the daily chart of ACC in Figure 11.7 to review
the points that we just discussed above. This coinciding of all pivots and
tools, isn’t it amazing again? What more could a trader ask for? By mid-
May, the price touched  1,750.



Figure 11.7: Confluence of factors on the daily chart of ACC with weekly pivots plotted. R1 is
at  1,510, R2 at about  1,530 and R3 at approximately  1,540. All these three levels are

matching, or overlapping, with the intraday R1, R2 and R3. As each resistance is taken out, it
confirms the trend’s strength. Above  1,540, the stock was flying in the open sky. You can see

that the stock also moved above the 200MA line.

The April 2017 march of the bulls continued in May 2017 as well.
Among other stocks, traders were going ga-ga over Godrej at that time.

There was news of the company having successfully sold some one
thousand homes in its new projects in NCR, Pune and Mumbai. The real
estate sector was already buzzing due to the RERA theme. The company is
amongst the more reputed players within the real estate sector. The entire
sector was higher on this particular day, namely 3 May 2017. Have a lookat
the intraday and daily charts in Figure 11.8 and Figure 11.9, respectively.
The stock rises intraday from about  513 to  586. The good thing was that
the morning gap proved digestible. It didn’t eat away the better part of the
day’s move. There were multiple entry points available, and had one
entered early in the day and kept trailing the stop loss using one of our
trailing techniques — remember 8MA trailing stop loss, for example? —
then one could have stayed with the move throughout the day. And when



the price starts moving against us, we exit. Simple as that., as you can see in
Figure 11.8.

Figure 11.8: A 5-minute chart of Godrej Properties, with daily pivots and 3 MA lines plotted
for 3 May 2017. The stock opens strongly and a minor pullback gets immediately absorbed by

the buyers. The very next candle is a giant bullish candle — everyone is going ga-ga over
Godrej. Once above R1, the trend is getting stronger and the next level to watch out would be
R2 and, then, R3. There isn’t even a mild correction anywhere and the stock stays above the

tightest moving average line of 8MA. It would have kept you in the trade for most of the move.

Remember, a rising stock above a rising 8MA line above a rising 20MA
line means a fattening bottom line for the trader. Let us also consider the
higher time frame chart, and see how the confluence of context, the pivots,
the trend and the MA all helped us.



Figure 11.9: Going ga-ga over the daily chart of Godrej Property with encouraging weekly
pivots and 20MA line.

You can observe in the chart in Figure 11.9 that the stock was rising, and
so was the 20MA line, thus showing a good trend. The move had only just
started from near the 20MA line support so there could defintely be more to
go. The stock started moving higher from a weekly pivot point and closed
around the R2 level line. Naturally, what you would next expect was a
move to the level of R3 at around  521, and anything above it would
always be welcome. The next morning this level of R3 was duly taken out
by the very first candle, and you had the whole day to fly high . .

The stock rose above  580 and then closed lower, but that shouldn’t
affect you. The daily chart had hinted towards a move from  505 to  520,
and above.

We have seen examples from cement, real estate and pharma sectors, but
how can we forget the ever-present theme of PSU banks. Throughout 2017,



there was this constant talk about how the government and RBI would
come up with some solution to the ever-burgeoning NPA issue of these
banks. This problem had been troubling the Indian economy for a very long
time and had led to major stock price declines in many banks over the
earlier few years. The banking sector being a crucial engine for the
economy’s growth, it was seen as vital that the banks improve their
financial health if the economy was indeed to see the green shoots and
growth pick up.

As the expectation of an NPA solution built up, there was a surge in
investor interest in this sector, especially towards the banks that were into
corporate lending.

Such macro-level news, when combined with the charts, can create
excellent opportunities. These opportunities may not just be intraday but
last even for many months to come. Depending on your interest, you can
choose to either trade or actively invest in them. Many of these stocks had
been largely ignored by investors for a long time and had been trading at a
fraction of their previous highs. Having fallen out of flavour, nobody was
paying any attention to them even at lower valuations. When
underownership of such major levels gets corrected, the trend reverses and
the moves in the new direction can get amplified beyond anyone’s
imagination. Such themes can go on giving newer stock ideas every week to
short term traders. You must ride such moves, so long as they exist.

As extreme short term traders, we will use all the regular tools from our
arsenal. We will combine as many of them as possible. If there is any micro
news pertaining to any specific scrip on a given day, we will try and utilise
that too in our favour. We will also see if the trend of the day is in our
favour, along with the sector strength on the given day. When everything
seems well-aligned, that’s when we fire on all cylinders. Essentially, what
we are doing is a combination of fundamental and technical trading. We are
taking macro events as themes and we are riding the momentum they
create, whenever they do so. We then confirm it on the charts and fine-tune
the trades for best possible entry timings.



The next two charts are for 4 May 2017. The first one is of ICICI Bank that
declared better than expected results the previous evening.

The NPA number in ICICI results was lower than feared. NPAs had been
the major problem areas for banking scrips. The stock was underowned, and
had been under-performing the Nifty Bank index for a long time. The ADRs
were higher by some 4% to 5% the previous night despite weak overseas
markets. When such long time under-performance corrects, the moves are
usually large — 10% intraday in this case. We don’t recommend one should
have entered it at the open. There was a huge gap up. A safer entry was once
our thesis was approved by market behaviour early in the day. The
important context here is that the stock had not risen at all prior to the
results. Thus, it was a fresh start post the result. In fact, the stock was going
into the event with accumulated shorts. Those shorts had now no choice but
to run for cover.

Another supporting factor was the announcement of bonus shares which
came as a positive surprise to many investors. Free!, Free!! Free!!! Indian
just love that, right? Who doesn’t?

In the case of ICICI Bank there were also multiple brokerage houses
announcing an upgrade for the stock, and these came with revised, higher
price targets. Now whether these targets later get achieved or not, and when
they do, is not our look out. As short term traders, we are opportunists
interested in the booster that such factors add to the momentum. So, more
the factors in our favour, the merrier the ride.



Figure 11.10: 5-minute chart of ICICI Bank.

Since ICICI Bank price had given the major move in the morning half
itself, a day trader could go hunting for another move during the second
half (see Figure 11.10). That’s where our next chart of Canara Bank comes
into the picture; it’s a chart of another PSU bank stock. And what a
wonderful chart it is, with so many well aligned factors! Have a look at
Figure 11.11.



Figure 11.11: This 5-minute chart of Canara Bank shows sideways consolidation for the
entire day, and a breakout only in the highly crucial last hour. The move had begun

simultaneously in all PSU banks during the last hour on this day. No alert trader could have
missed that. Market timing factor also plays a role here.

Let us now consider the chart of the private sector bank, Federal Bank for
28 April 2017 (see Figure 11.12). The bank had announced excellent
numbers, as a result of which it was definitely in the news — and also on
every alert trader’s radar.



Figure 11.12: Federal Bank’s intraday chart with intraday pivots and 20MA, 50MA and
200MA lines.

The chart in Figure 11.12 shows R1, R2, R3 at around one rupee intervals
between  95 and  97. A move above the level of  95 would indicate a
very strong day for the stock as per intraday pivots. The stock had opened
strong and was adding to its strength with each new candle. Immediately
after the first candle it rose above the resistance R1, and in doing so it also
reached above the high of the previous many days.

You can see this clearly when you see the 60-minute chart in Figure
11.13, which presents the larger context and the monthly pivots. It was a
breakout move above the sideways range of many days. And it was fuelled
by a news event. To add to the strength of our case, the move was slow
enough and steady enough to provide multiple entry opportunities through
the day. The price action remained well above the 20MA line, even on the
small time frame of 5 minutes. The previous day had been a narrow range
day and the morning move had begun from the support of both the 20MA
and 50MA lines overlapping each other. These factors by themselves are



very strong. Let us see what additional factor the larger context can offer us
(see Figure 11.13).

Figure 11.13: 60-minute Federal Bank chart with monthly pivots. The chart clearly shows
that the rise above  95 was a breakout from many days of narrow range. The monthly R1 was

also at the level of  95, so that the intraday R1 and the monthly R1 were same, and that
coincides with the high of the last many days’ range. So crossing above that level was highly

significant. In this case, it happened right at the first candle. The immediate next target was 
98 which got surpassed easily. In fact, the move had just begun. The price had started moving

higher from the support levels of daily and weekly charts. On this day the entire banking sector
was rising strongly, so there was sectoral strength as well. Once the level of  97 was taken out,

the immediate next level was  103 on monthly pivots.

These examples vividly exhibit the high energy of synergistic confluence,
and this synergy amplifies a move.

Stocks of the Same Sector Moving Together
Another kind of confluence gets created when stocks belonging to the same
sector or industry rise or fall together. Even if some stocks do not have any



event related action, just the rub-off effect from other stocks of the same
sector may suffice to create big moves. There’s nothing wrong in trading
these rub-off stocks if you want to, or if you have missed the main bus.

The move in Dena Bank (see Figure 11.14), consequent to the move of
the above-mentioned Federal Bank is another example of the rub-off effect
on sectoral friends. It was the spill-over emotion of Federal Bank results
that was driving the Dena Bank stock. Be that as it may, as far as we are
concerned, we focus not on the cause but on the effect.

Figure 11.14: 60-minute chart of Dena Bank with weekly pivots. Focus on the last day on the
right side of the chart and see how easily the weekly resistances get surpassed within a day,

courtesy the move in Federal Bank and sectoral strength impact. The move above  41.3 was a
multi-day range breakout. The price level of approximately  42, was the resistance R2, R3 on

daily, weekly and monthly pivots.

There is another kind of confluence which gives a trade in the reverse
direction. By reverse, we don’t mean necessarily counter trend here. What
is meant is that the stock may seemingly be showing signs of going higher
but then there comes along some confluence of resistances which provides a
good shorting opportunity. Or, when a stock seems to be going lower but
meets some confluence of supports that reverses the direction and gives us a



long trade. This could even be in the direction of the main trend. If so, it
becomes an even stronger trade. Such a confluence can also occur in range
bound markets. This can be called as a confluence of aligning indicators,
and which can be a trap setup during a corrective move.

The day may begin with the opening range getting created in a way that
keeps the price within a narrow band. The price then halts at one of the
extreme ends of this opening range. If this level also happens to be a
resistance, or support, on higher time frames, then it may prove more
difficult and may not get crossed. The stock then temporarily makes an
effort to break out of the opening range, but without much success. It may
immediately and forcefully retrace within the range. Or, it may also move
strongly towards the other end of the range.

This creates a trap for traders who could not decipher the move. They are
then left with no option but to cover their positions to avoid immediate
losses. If the morning range also overlaps with the range of the previous
day, or the previous few days, or with any significant levels, then the trade
setup gets stronger. So, it is a case of a trap with a confluence (see Figure
11.15)!

Figure 11.15: The chart of Nifty Bank shows a confluence of levels — early range is the same
as the prior low, and a temporary break from this turns out to be a trap setup.



It is important to note that such trades will have a higher probability of
working out successfully on days when there is quick action and high
volumes in the market. On dull days, the price may find it difficult to reach
the other end of the range. It may, instead, loiter around, keeping you
itching for action and scratching your head. Another way of adding more
confirmation for such trades is by being on the side of the main trend. When
we take trades in the direction of the trend rather than those on the opposite
side, we are increasing the odds in our favour. In most of our examples, the
trade is indeed in the direction of the main trend. You will add still more
confirmation for such trades when the false breakouts are slow and short-
lived, and when the bounce back in the main direction is sharp and quick.
That shows the eagerness of the market players to sustain the trending
direction. If this is found lacking, it is a sign of caution.

It is a commonly known fact that breakouts fail more often than not.
Rather than cursing the market at such times, why not look at capitalising
on them? When moves in one direction fail, the market is telling you
something. Why not sit up and listen to the market’s message instead of
cursing it? If you don’t obsess yourself in looking for a justification for
your failure, then you will successfully find the opportunity that the
market’s move brings along. Every failure is an opportunity, either to step
aside and be patient till the time is right for a fresh trade, or to take a
reverse trade as and when it seems right.

If a trader gets depressed with failure, then he or she will never be able to
recognise the next opportunity for success. We all fail, but that doesn’t stop
us from moving on with the next trade immediately. It’s all in a day’s work.

So, keep faith. Even an SRK can give a bad film like Happy New Year.
Even a Karan Johar can act in a failure like Bombay Velvet. Even Sachin
Tendulkar can get out for a duck. Even Big B can go into debt and then rise
higher, more successful and more determined than ever. When life or the
market punishes you for something, take note and try to hear its message.
There may be a hidden lesson. It might be trying to teach you something.
Learn from it. Earn from it.



The next three chapters are extremely crucial. No serious trader should
close the book without reading these. One of them ensures your stay in the
game for longer, and thus increases the chance of your success. The next
two increase your chances of success, not just in trading but in every single
facet of life.

It is rightly said of the stock markets that people who come armed only with money gain
only experience. Those who come with experience, make all the money.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 12

OceanofPDF.com



Money Management

Introduction
When he blew up a 100K at the blackjack table in a casino, a customer
yelled: “How can you lose a 100K at a 10K table!”
Another customer replies: “Patience my friend . . . .”

Money is what you need to stay alive, to fight another battle, another day,
for another trade.

This chapter is all about money and money management for traders. If
not handled well, losses and risk can grow exponentially in no time at all.
Ignorance or indiscipline in managing capital can bring down not just you
and I, but even the Enrons, Worldcoms and Satyams of the world. So, let’s
see what constitutes fiscal discipline for a trader.

Well, there is both good news and bad. The bad news is that neither the
system that we share here, nor any other system in the whole wide world
can promise you risk-free trades or guaranteed returns — or a 100% trade
success rate. The good news is that you don’t need these either.

Your success as a trader doesn’t come from being right every single time.
One of the key factors in trading the success is money management. It is
only through a solid money management system that a trader can build
wealth over a period of time. Please note, I am saying a period of time;
there is no overnight magic anyway.



What is Money Management

Well timed entries and exits are a trader’s way to defend his capital. This game is first
about capital preservation, followed by capital growth. — Ashwani Gujral

Trading is not gambling and neither should it be treated as such. It is a
business and every business has to have plans for funds management and
cash flow. There has to be a rationale behind every decision pertaining to
funds. Such fiscal discipline is of utmost importance and it must be adhered
to every single day, in every single trade.

Someone has rightly said: To err is human, but if the eraser wears out before the pencil,
you might be overdoing it. Someone has also said: To forgive is divine. But D-Street doesn’t
take this seriously. It never forgives.

Every trader who is serious about building wealth in the market has to
adhere to the principles of money management. This adherence ensures
your long term survival in the game. Failed trades are part of a trader’s
daily life; every trader will have his share of these. Nobody can be right all
the time. When you are clear about your money management plans, and
when you strictly follow those plans, you survive and thrive in this game.

Money management will ensure that you never bet beyond your risk
capacity. Risk is inevitable. But the amount of risk can be controlled by
controlling the size of the bet on each trade. That’s exactly what money
management does. It tells you how much to bet on any given trade.
That bet size is called position size.

Money management is, thus, clearly not just about stop loss. While we
will learn more about stop losses in this chapter, but let us be clear that stop
loss defines the risk in a given trade setup. It tells you about the loss or risk
in terms of points. You multiply it with your position size, and you get the
total risk in terms of the amount. Money management, on the other hand,
gives you the position size. It answers, how much of the stock you should
buy or sell. Nevertheless, in order to clearly understand the concept of
position size in a given trade, we will start with some lessons on stop loss.



Stop Loss Revisited
It doesn’t matter what college professors teach about efficient markets
theory. The fact remains that human behaviour is driven more by emotion
than by logic. People will often behave irrationally. If markets were rational
then I would have been a waiter and not a rich man, said Warren Buffett.
Even those who believe and swear by the honesty and capabilities of top
managements based on corporate balance sheets do not understand many
things. After spending an entire life together, we often fail to know even our
own family members well. We expect one thing from past patterns but we
often see unexpected changes as newer life developments take place in our
lives. There is always an element of the unknown

Every balance sheet can be camouflaged. That’s not to say that every
balance sheet is camouflaged. All that is being said is that since there are
always unknown risks around, the greater the number of factors we check,
higher the chances of getting things right. That’s all. So let’s accept the risk
and learn to use charts as well as money management. Stick to price action.
Stick to stop losses, not to opinions and beliefs. As Gujaratis often say:
Bhav ej bhagwan (price is God).

Technicals don’t lie. People may.

Stop loss is essentially the difference between your entry price level and
the level at which you will exit your trade if it goes against you. It is
defined in terms of points, and is derived from technical analysis. Say, you
enter Scrip A at the price level of  243. You look at the charts and decide to
exit if it falls below  240, then your stop loss is 3 points, or  3. When you
multiply it with the quantity of stock that you are trading, you get the total
risk or total potential loss per trade in terms of rupees.

We strictly urge that the amount of total risk per trade must never
exceed 2% of your total trading capital.

Thus, suppose your total trading capital is  5 lakh, namely 500K. The
maximum permissible risk, or loss per trade, must then never exceed 2% of
this amount, namely  10,000. Only in very exceptional cases, when the



market is clearly trending and so is your stock, and when the volumes are
high and the trend is young, and when the local and the global setup are all
in your favour should you allow a minor variation and permit yourself to
raise this limit up to 3%. This must not happen every now and then, only
exceptionally. This variation in total amount is allowed due to increased
volumes that one may want to trade in clearly trending markets, and not due
to a wider stop loss in terms of points. You will understand this more clearly
as we proceed.

On the other hand, when the markets are sideways, and when the
volumes are thin as well, you can even restrict your position size to 1% loss
of capital per trade. For more than 90% of your trades, you must stick to the
2% permissible risk / loss per trade on total trading capital. For all trades,
irrespective of the lot size, two per cent means two per cent, whatever the
lot size. Period.

Deriving the Stop Loss

Stop losses are like condoms. If you refuse to use them, you may be left holding the baby,
forever.

There are traders who decide stop losses on the basis of their
willingness to lose money either in terms of percentage or amount. They
use the amount that they are willing to risk for every trade they take to
derive the stop loss.
There are traders who will accept X per cent of trading capital as
acceptable loss for every trade they take. This per cent may have
nothing to do with technical analysis, chart patterns, or tools.
Traders also often like to stick to fixed rupee stop loss for every trade
and they exit the trade if the loss mounts to that level.

All such methods of determining a stop loss are random. The market
doesn’t care what your risk appetite is. It does what it is best at doing. It is
neither your friend, nor your enemy. It is neither aiming at forgiving your



mistakes, nor determined to give you any favours. It is just doing its stuff. If
there is any problem, it is with you. It is within you and/or your system.

The stop losses must come from the market technicals and not from your
mood of the moment. Yes, as day traders we can keep time stop losses. That
is, you may choose to exit a trade if it is taking too long to work out. That’s
also because a good trade will work from the word go. If it stalls for too
long, you might be missing out on better alternate opportunities.

For day traders it is very important to time their trades well. Entering too
early means wasting time as well as losing other opportunities, while
entering late means bigger risk. So you must try to get not just the trade
direction right, but also the timing. As F&O traders, you are betting not just
on the direction but also on the volatility and timing. So the stop loss levels
must be derived on the basis of some logic:

This logic can be the low / high of the entry candle and the nearby
swing low / high, as we have kept in our buy/sell trade setups in the
examples in this book.
It can also be the pattern low for those who trade chart patterns, such as
head and shoulders, etc.
It can be some volatility based stop loss, such as below or above the
MA lines like we did in the trailing stop loss technique.

The point is that the stop loss must be arrived at from logical levels and
not from your whims, fancies, dreams, desires, fears, greed, or any other
emotion. You cannot say that you will keep the stop loss at, say, 5%, just
because you feel comfort in that. The market doesn’t care about your
comfort, nor about what you think. You must control risk by following
trading logic. That’s how you better the chances of seeing your stop loss
levels sustain. If the levels still do not sustain, you must get out. At such
times, the market is trying to tell you something — and you ignore its
message at your own peril.

Stay with the trend and stick with the stop losses; leave the past, and live the future.



All Scrips are Different, So Must the Stops Be

The value of stop loss in terms of points will vary with each stock. Some
stocks have lower volatility and smaller candle formations. Accordingly,
these will have smaller stop losses. Other stocks with higher volatility and
bigger candles may have wider stop losses in terms of points. The position
size in each of these will vary accordingly. Lower the volatility, the smaller
will be the stop loss in points, and higher the position size that you may be
able to afford with the same amount of total risk. It is also possible that
some F&O contracts may simply not fit your account size. You have a
choice to reject those. Exercise the right. Make a choice. Every stock is
different. And each stock should be looked at differently. Each comes with
its own level of volumes, liquidity, volatility, risk and returns. Not
everything may be right for you, or suitable for your account size. Have a
look at Table 12.1 for clarity. If you fail to follow these principles, then you
may be causing yourself not just monetary damage but something even
bigger. Understanding this table is crucial. The cost of ignoring it can be
very high.

When Stop Losses Get Triggered

Write it down in bold letters on all your walls — there is no shame in
triggered stop losses. There shouldn’t be any stigma attached to it. It is
very normal and it is a part and parcel of a trader’s life.

You can do the following things when it happens to you:



1. Analyse the trade and see if you get thrown out merely by random
market noise. If yes, then again two things.

2. First, a good-quality stop loss must be wide enough to contain the noise,
yet narrow enough to keep you afloat as per money management rules.
So check out and, if needed, work on your technical know-how going
ahead. Placing stop losses exactly where expected is a sure way to get
hunted. There has to be some minor amount of buffer which will depend
on the kind of scrip that you are dealing with, its volatility at the time of
trade, and the chart setup.

3. Second, if the stop loss was triggered as a result of a sudden turn in the
market, then see if the turn was short-lived and whether the trend looks
intact. See if the move is resuming in the original direction with a
decent amount of vigour and volumes. If yes, re-enter the trade. Such
traps could give great trades.

4. If the trend resumption seems to be lacking participation or conviction,
then it is a good idea to just step aside and wait it out.

5. If it is a strong reversal with good volumes, then you can enter in the
reverse direction. That can be done provided you have quick enough
reflexes and don’t get frozen into inaction by a loss.

In either of the cases, keep haste and desperation under control. Bus,
train, and trade opportunity, ek jayegi . . . toh dusri aayegi . . . yaad hai na
(if one goes, others will come along).

Modifying the Stop Loss Midway

Very often traders get into the habit of modifying the stop losses in an
ongoing trade. For one, they widen the stop loss when they see the price
nearing their pre-determined stop loss level. They do this with the intention
of accommodating wider gyrations before the trend and the scrip may
resume the move in their favour. This is a huge sign of nonprofessional
behaviour. Once a stop loss, always a stop loss. There is no question of
midway modifications. Other than for trailing the stop loss in a winning
trade, there is no question of fiddling with these levels.



The safest thing to do is to always keep the stop loss order entered into
the system, and not merely made a mental note of. You are not monitoring
the screen for modification of risk. In fact, there shouldn’t be any decision
left to be taken once you enter a trade. The entire path must be chalked out
before taking the entry. There is no point going on hoping if the trade goes
against you.

Stop looking for some miraculous Viagra that might lift your collapsing stocks higher.
Obey your stop losses.

It is your emotion, false hope, your refusal to face facts and, probably,
your ego that are at play when you resort to such suicidal behavioural
patterns. The price may very well move in your favour after triggering your
stop loss. So what if it does? Nothing justifies modifying the stop loss
midway.

If the trade again moves in your favour, nobody stops you from
reentering. But if the stock has not respected your levels at the given
moment, you must dump it. You must promise to yourself that you will not
hesitate when the time appears ripe for a re-entry. If that doesn’t happen in
the same stock, then you can always look for another stock.

Once you are mentally free from a losing trade, you can focus on newer
opportunities. Your clarity will definitely be better once you are out of a
trade gone bad. The smaller the loss, the easier and quicker is the recovery.

Staying with a loss is no way to recover from it. Time is not the medicine
for everything. Accepting facts is the way forward.

Total Risk or Drawdown Value
Now we know that the maximum amount of risk allowed per trade involves
two variables; one is the stop loss in points, and the other is the position
size for a given trade. This total risk amount is also called the drawdown
value. It means that the total capital available for your next trade is lower by
that much value. Say, you started with 100K, or rupees one lakh, and you



lost 20K in two trades. Your drawdown amount is then 20K, and your
available capital for next trade is 80K.

To summarise:

1. Total Risk / Drawdown = Risk in points × No. of shares (volume or
position size).

2. Drawdown per Trade or Total Risk per Trade <=2% of Total trading
capital.

Position Size
We now come to position sizing, which is the main crux of this chapter. We
strongly recommend that the upper limit of the total permissible risk per
trade must be kept fixed at 2%. Now we know that this is called the
drawdown amount. The stop loss in terms of points is a variable, and should
ideally come from the technicals and charts. Thus, this is not something
which is in our hands. The only variable that we can control is the
position size. And that’s money management. We divide the permissible
drawdown per trade by the stop loss in points. And we get the permissible
position size.

Position size = Total permitted risk in amount ÷ Stop loss in points.
Say, for example, you have  2 lakh in your trading account. Taking a

risk of not more than 2% of the entire trading capital means a total
permissible loss per trade of  4K. If you see a trade setup on charts with
stop loss of, say,  6, i.e. 6 points, you can afford to take the trade for up to
666 shares (4,000 ÷ 6 = 666). Rounding it off, let’s say you can buy up to
650 shares.

With a stop loss of 6 points and a position size of 650, your loss per trade
stays within the permissible limit of  4K. So if the lot size in F&O segment
is, say, 600, you can afford to buy one only lot, and no more.

This method ensures that you never lose more than 2% of your total
trading capital on any single trade. This is most important because it keeps
you in the game for longer.



Imagine if you go on losing 10% of your capital on each trade, you
would be broke if ten consecutive stop losses were to get triggered. And,
no, this is not very unusual. It can happen. No matter how good or bad you
are. And if it does, it will wipe you out. As John Keynes said: “Markets can
remain irrational for a time period that is longer than the period for which
you can maintain solvency.”

Drawdowns Can Really Draw You Down
You must have heard your share of interesting, read shocking, stories from
the 2008 stock market disaster, like those of Amtek Auto or Unitech. Here’s
another disastrous story from then. A small stock called Shiv-Vani Oil &
Gas Exploration, one of India’s largest oilfield services providers, was quite
a favourite among many market players at that time. The share price was
around  700 at the highs of January 2008. By January 2009, the price was
down to about  100, and it was at  6, yes, just  6 in early 2016 when
lenders took over the company. The company boasted of customers such as
ONGC and Oil India and investors like Franklin Templeton till 2010 who
had faith in its capabilities. So what? What goes down need not come up
when you want it to. Got the point? And this is also applicable to blue chips,
which too can erode very badly when markets crash.

The major problem with drawdowns is that recovery from losses requires
much higher rates of return or percentage returns. Let us understand how.

The Math Behind the Drawdown Losses

If you incur a major loss in any single trade, your available trading capital
goes down. Until you recover the loss, you cannot come into overall profits.
The bigger the drawdown, the larger will have to be your profit from the
next trade, or from the next few trades, to get you back even to neutral. In
percentage terms, to recover from a 50% loss you will have to gain 100%
returns just to bring you to neutral level. Here is how.



Suppose your stock goes down by 50%, say, it falls from  100 to  50.
Now assume that it recovers again by the same percentage, namely by 50%.
That is a rise of  25 — 50% of  50 is  25. So now the new value of your
stock is  75. You are still down by 25% as you bought it at  100. Thus, it
will take 100% profit returns simply to bring your capital back to its
original level.

A stock that goes down by 50%, and again goes up by 50%, is still down by 25%.

Your first mistake was that of having taken a wrong trade. That can be
forgiven. The bigger mistake is that of holding onto it for so long that the
loss grows so big. That’s unforgiveable. Often traders stay with a trade only
because they feel that they have already invested time and energy into it.
They need to remember that a mistake is cheapest at the start; it only gets
bigger the longer you stay with it. Never stay with a mistake just because
you invested a lot of time in making one.

Take a look at Table 12.2. It shows the returns that you will need to
generate after various levels of drawdowns, simply to reach back to your
original capital level or to breakeven. This vividly highlights why you must
control your total amount of loss per single trade.

Table 12.2
Recovering from Drawdowns

Drawdown of total trading capital (%) Returns / recovery required to breakeven (%)
5 5.3
10 11.1
15 17.6
20 25.0
25 33.0
30 42.9
50 100.0
60 150.0
70 300.0
80 900.0

That’s why we say that drawdowns can draw you down . . . very down. If
you operate this way, you will never make money.



The moral of the story is that controlling the damage and limiting losses
is far better than running after recoveries. Getting into a bad trade can hurt,
but holding on to it can hurt even more.

Figure 12.1: Let it go . . . release it . . . and relieve yourself! Making mistakes is pardonable.
Staying with a mistake is definitely not.

Everybody makes mistakes; winners are those who correct their
mistakes, and not those who stick with them and allow them to grow bigger.

The Mental Damage of Drawdowns

A drawdown is not limited to damaging your trading capital. It goes much
beyond that. Drawdowns cause huge emotional damage that can last longer
than the financial impact. Drawdowns can rob a trader of his confidence. If
they happen repeatedly and are not controlled, they can wear off his self-
esteem. The impact can last for many trades. A drawdown can create
desperation, and that can lead to hasty decisions. It can also send a trader
into a shell and he may shy away from newer trade ideas. That can lead to a



lack of opportunities coming his way. He may be surrounded by others who
may be putting on even false impressions of being super successful. That
can add to his desperation. We will be dealing with this issue of handling
emotions in Chapter 13.

What we are essentially doing with our money management system is
that we are factoring in a series of consecutive losses and yet ensuring that
we do not get thrown out of business. Survival is the key — Jaan hai toh
Jahan hai as a Hindi saying goes — so long you are alive, you can conquer
the world! So long as you are not forced to quit, there remains the chance of
bouncing back. To keep going, you need both financial strength as well as
mental strength. So you have to protect both. All said and done financial
damages leave bruises at multiple places, including on your mind. This
becomes all the more important in leveraged products. Whether you earn or
not, you will have to pay the mark to market (MTM) margin. This creates
immense pressure if mishandled.

Factoring in Slippage Losses

Not all your orders will be limit orders. Depending on your trading style, at
times there will be market orders as well. In the case of market orders, there
could be a sizeable difference between the price at which you expected to
get your order filled and the actual price at which it does get filled,
particularly in a volatile market with high volumes. There could also be
runaway gaps during fast moving markets. All of these can result in entries
at prices higher than anticipated, and selling at lower levels. With regular
trading, multiple trades a day, and with significant account size slippage,
losses could add up to sizeable amounts. A trader must factor in these costs
of doing business. Also to be factored in is the cost of taxes and
commissions. Commission costs can also vary in a wide range, and you will
be paying these not just on profits but also on losing trades. Which is why
you must negotiate a good deal from your broker. Anybody paying
brokerages higher than the minimum is an idiot. These costs may be a very
small part of the trader’s middle-line as a whole but controlling them will
definitely add to the bottom line.



Profit Expectations — What is Enough?

As you sow, so shall you reap. There are no rules defining an average or an
above average performance. A trader defines his own average. A good
trader will make consistent money, while a lethargic, undisciplined dreamer
will help other good traders build their wealth by his daily market
donations.

What makes a winner is the allocation of capital and its risk management.
We have seen that there has to be some acceptable ratio between the amount
that you risk and the reward that you look forward to. The higher this ratio,
the better it is for the trader. The upper side can be anything; there is no
limit to it. History has shown people achieving 5- and 6-digit returns over
time. It is only risk that needs to have boundaries. The returns must be
better and bigger than the risk being undertaken in every trade.

Risk Management Mistakes Traders Often Make

Traders often resort to practices such as averaging and hedging in order to
manage risk. None of these can save you. Instead, you will get yourself
deeper into the soup. There are also people who like to double their position
size after losses. They do this in the hope of recovering multiple losses with
one gain. They believe that just because they have been through a series of
losses, their probability of victory in the next trade is higher. That’s total
ignorance about the laws of probability.

According to the theory of probability, each individual trade has an equal
probability of being a loser or a winner trade. The chances of profit or loss
will always be 50%. So just because you have failed, say, 5 times, it doesn’t
mean that you have any higher probability that the sixth trade will be a
winner. Please do not harbour any such superstitions. I have seen people
adopting weird ways and means to guess whether a stock is a buy or a sell
call — and then they blame the markets. Any increase in position size on
the basis of such assumptions is an invitation to self-sabotage and fiscal
suicide.



Recovering money from a losing position is ten times more difficult than
making money from a winning position. Strong trends don’t give up easily,
and staying in their way is not the correct thing to do.

Buying options also doesn’t mean risk management by any stretch of
imagination. Leverage is a double edged sword. Whatever generates a high
return will generate higher risk as well. If you put your entire trading capital
into options and do not properly manage the risk, you can go broke there as
well. With futures, the ratio of risk and reward is linear. So when you hedge
your losses, you are hedging your profits, too. Never forget that. On top of
it all, you are adding to the costs, taxes and commissions. Capital must be
preserved, yes, but it must also grow. Else, there is no point investing your
time, money, attention and energy. The best thing is to understand and
accept that losses are not worth managing, just have the acceptable loss
levels pre-determined, cut your trades there, and move on.

The best way to control risk is by knowing what you are doing. If you
know your job well, both stress and risk will be easier to control.

Your Exit Strategy Is Also a Part of Money
Management

Money once earned must not be returned to the market beyond a certain
pre-determined level. That doesn’t mean you refuse to stay with the stock
that is willing to stay with you. But as the trend matures, as the profit
grows, as major resistances approach, you must grow increasingly vigilant
and have a definite exit strategy in place beforehand. It could be an MA
line, a particular pivot, your pre-defined target level, or 50% retracement,
whatever it is that suits you best. The point is, you must have an exit plan
and stick with it. Those who trade multiple positions or contracts can even
use partial profit booking.

Don’t Always Wait for Stop Losses to Get Triggered



You can learn a lesson without paying a price. In normal circumstances, we
keep some buffer space in placing stops and we don’t exit whether out of
fear or some other reason. But, say, you are long in a stock and you see a
sudden negative news-break regarding the company — something which is
very common in stock markets, or there is a sudden macro news-break, like
the one on the day of surgical strikes on Pakistan in September 2016, then
you don’t need to wait for the stop loss to get triggered. In such cases, you
can exit with a lower loss value. There could also be a possibility that you
realise that your trade is technically incorrect. Ideally, this must not happen
and you are expected to do your trade planning very diligently beforehand.
But if it does, then you don’t just keep hoping and praying. You accept the
mistake and exit at the earliest without waiting for the stop loss to trigger.

You are permitted to make mistakes; but not mighty ones. Always tell yourself: “Thou
shalt remain solvent.”

When Can You Increase Your Position Size
A position size increase should only be considered after you double your
trading capital. Say, the lot sizes permit you to buy one lot for every 
350,000. Then you can buy a second lot only when you have  7 lakh or
more in your trading kitty. The overall leverage must be maintained. If you
are trading with a leverage of, say, 50%, that percentage has to be sustained.
Often traders increase their position sizes without any such considerations,
based purely on the strength of their conviction on a call. While nobody can
stop you from doing so, the law of probability that we explained earlier will
remain in play. The chances of success for a given trade do not increase or
diminish based on your perception of the move. Also, just because a few
trades worked out well is no reason to start increasing your position size.
Each decision has to be governed by trading logic and math. Emotions have
no place and must be kept strictly under control. You will make money only
when you understand the emotions of others while keeping your own totally
under control.



Hit Ratio and Risk-Reward Ratio
The ratio between the risk that you accept and the reward that you expect
should always be 1:2, or higher. This means that for every one rupee of risk,
you must target at least two rupees of profit. Moreover, this expectation
must be based on analysis, and not wishful thinking. The success ratio can
be as low as 50%, or even lower, and you can still emerge a winner
provided you keep your losses under control and keep riding your big
winners.

With a hit ratio of just 50%, you still end up winning at the end of the
month because of two factors:

1. You never allowed your losses to exceed the upper permissible limit.
2. You showed patience during the winning trades and achieved your

targets.

Even if this ratio comes down to 40%, you are still in the green. Study
the various outcomes in Table 12.3.

Table 12.3
100 Trades at Different Hit Ratio and Risk-Reward Ratio

Parameters / Variables Case I Case II Case III Case IV
Total Trades 100 100 100 100
Hit Ratio 30% 50% 50% 40%
Risk-Reward Ratio 1:2 1:1 1:2 1:2
No. of losing trades 70 50 50 60
No. of winning trades 30 50 50 40
Total loss in losing trades 70 50 50 60
Total gains in winning trades 60 50 100 80
Net gains -10 0 50 20

Ride Your Winners

Yes, I know it feels great to book profits. But never do so prematurely. You
may have often heard that nobody goes broke booking profits. That isn’t
necessarily so. If you keep booking out smaller amounts of profits and
refuse to ride profitable trades for longer even in a giving market, then one



big loss can wipe out multiple smaller profits combined. Staying long
enough in profitable trades is as important as cutting off quickly from losing
trades. Money over the longer term will be made only by a limited number
of trades. The Pareto Principle of 80:20 is almost always in play. As per this
principle, 80% of your profits will come from 20% of your trades. Also,
most of your profits will come from the trades that will return you amounts
equivalent to 3 to 5 times the risk. Strong trends don’t break easily and can
go on, not just for an entire day but even for multiple days for those
interested in holding their positions longer. We have seen many such charts
in the previous chapters. When you happen to be with one such trade, your
aim must be to ride the wave as long as possible. Remember, maintaining
an existing position is also trading.

So because strong moves don’t end easily, we exit these only once they
start going in the opposite direction to our position. The reason to continue
holding should be that a trade is moving favourably. What most traders do
is exactly the opposite. They stick with a trade when they should be
dumping it. They dump one when they should be sticking with it.

Balancing the Hit Ratio and Risk-Reward Ratio

If you think that the hit ratio is meaningless and you can simply focus on
risk and reward, then you might be making a mistake. There are various
combinations of the two that make a winner as we just saw in Table 12.3.
The trade outcome is the result of both the ratios, not just any one. Doing
some further analysis, we derive the combinations given in Table 12.4. It is
important to understand these combinations as this would help you analyse
your monthly trading journey better.

The key point is that with a higher ratio between reward and risk, you
will be able to sustain profits despite a lower hit ratio or success ratio. So
don’t get carried by the desire to be right all the time. There’s more to
success than that. After all, there is a limit to which you can control the
success ratio. That other factor is the amount of profit you make in trades
that work in your favour.



Have a look at Table 12.4. This is a hypothetical example wherein a
trader again takes a hundred trades. We go on lowering the hit ratio from
60% to 20%, while we go on raising the reward to risk ratio from 1 to 5. We
make different combinations such that the net gains stay constant. In other
words, the loss on the losing trade is constant. Gain on the winning trade is
derived as per the risk and reward ratio. Observe how with an increasing
reward to risk ratio, the trader can maintain his net gain despite a lower hit
ratio.

Table 12.4
Different Combinations of Hit Ratio and Risk Ratio

Variables Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5
Reward to Risk 1 2 3 4 5
Hit Ratio 60 40 30 24 20
Gain 60 80 90 96 100
Loss 40 60 70 76 80
Net Gain 20 20 20 20 20

You would note that as the reward goes on improving for every rupee of
risk, you could stay afloat with lower and lower success ratio. Focus on
both for a winning combination. Thus, for example, a 40% hit ratio and a
2:1 reward to risk ratio is a very well-known combination.

After taking all the required precautions if you are still in the red on any
given day then just remind yourself of a very famous incident. One day in
1976, Ronald Wayne, the lesser known co-founder of Apple Inc., sold his
entire 10% stake in Apple for USD 800. A few decades later, in March
2016, the same stock was worth some USD 62 billion. You are not the only
one!

Diversification as Risk Management
The first thing to recognise is that no amount of diversification can protect
you against bad planning or poor implementation of technicals and / or
ignoring money management rules. So, by itself, diversification doesn’t
spare you from the hard work. Diversification cannot protect you against
ignorance, lethargy or hibernation.



Secondly, while diversifying one must choose negatively co-related
stories. If you are diversifying among three stocks, all of which are
expected to rise or fall together, then it hardly serves any purpose. The
selected scrips or sectors should ideally be expected to move differently.
While these things are more relevant for medium term position holders,
short term traders may choose to diversify depending on their trading style
and account size. They can choose more than one sectors that are current
flavours of the market. As we write this in the first half of 2017, real estate,
PSU banks, capital goods and even FMCGs were moving well; 2016 had
been more about metals and NBFCs moving in a major way.

At times, traders may also choose multiple stocks within the same sector
for intraday trading. While you may know that today is the day for PSU
banks, you don’t know which one is going to surge the most. These are not
negatively co-related but, still, if one of the banks rises less, the other may
compensate by being the top mover for the day.

How much diversification is needed? Neither too much, nor too little
is the ideal recipe. Diversification is all about not putting all the eggs in
one basket. While it sounds simple, it’s not so simple to implement.

Having said that, it must be added that diversification doesn’t mean you
have ten open positions at one time. Over-doing diversification can cause
more damage than good. You may give away gains from one trade due to a
loss incurred in the other. One must know one’s limits, keep practical
considerations in mind, and stay within boundaries. Remember, each open
position demands time and attention.

One must also remember that in the case of a sudden carnage or sharp
fall, no amount of diversification can help. Diversification doesn’t mean
you ignore stop losses. The basic reason behind diversifying is that the
chart patterns may not necessarily work as expected. We have seen multiple
ways to control losses, and diversification is only one. It protects you with
the law of averages. A short term trader will also have to keep in view the
cost of over-doing diversification since trading costs can multiply into big
amounts merely due to a high number of smaller value transactions, plus the
daily volume per trade. The penalties could include slippages, transaction
costs, etc. Thus, much like leverage, diversification is also a double edged
sword. It reduces the losses in one position due to a sudden adverse move,



but it can also reduce the profits in another position which is working in
your favour. All said and done, position size is the basic tool of risk
control for a trader. It’s easy to understand that 500 shares of something is
always riskier than 100 shares of the same thing.

How Often Should You Measure Your
Performance?
A day trader is in the business of capital defence. Unless he keeps regular
track of his capital, he will not know how well or how poorly he is doing
his job. He is expected to be highly objective in his approach. His aim
should be to go home for the day in the green. He doesn’t get stressed in
case something doesn’t work out. He faces the consequences calmly. He
keeps a close tab on his account statements. He never runs away from
issues. He faces them upfront and fixes the issues wherever he can. Stress is
the outcome of an inability to understand a situation and the resultant
feeling that one lacks the resources or the ability to meet the situation or
take remedial action. If you really know what you are doing, half the stress
will vanish immediately. An objective evaluation of the situation at hand,
the guts to face it upfront, and the ability to take timely corrective actions
are the qualities of a solid day trader.

Failing is actually vitally important for big success. It changes you forever, and for the
better, provided you learn and retain the right attitude. Provided you learn the right
lessons, failure is your best teacher.

Are You Overtrading?
One of the major issues that often afflicts many traders is the need to be
always doing something. While day trading will keep providing trading
opportunities every few minutes, not all of them may necessarily come



under your purview at the right moment. Not all may be of equal quality.
Not all may have the support of volumes, news event, corroborating higher
time frame technicals, sectoral support or macro support. Just because a trap
is laid out, you don’t have to get trapped. Use filters as per your trading
plans, and take only the best trades. There are no border lines that define
overtrading. But if you are taking too many trades without making any
money, that’s overtrading.

Making money in trading is sometimes a lot of hard work. Sitting and
doing nothing for long duration also takes a lot, after all!

Trading merely to recover the loss from a previous trade is not technical
trading. Trading for the sake of revenge doesn’t qualify as technicals either.
Take the compulsion out, and take charge of yourself. Not doing anything is
sometimes the best trade. It is not about the number of trades that you take.

Let us pay heed to Shivaji, founder of the Maratha Empire and a master
of guerrilla warfare who said: He who fights and runs away, lives to fight
another day. There has to be a good balance between patience during arrow
sideways markets and quick reflexes when trading action is called for
required. What is important is that your hands must not shake or hesitate
when the time comes for pulling the trigger. That moment is not going to
last forever. Especially in day trading, the window of opportunity stays
open for a very limited time.

Attack with full force at the right moment; do your thing, and get out —
again at the right moment. If the scene on the field starts looking different,
you cannot keep waiting till the end of the day. You must follow your
predetermined rules and get out before you get thrown out.

Heard that song from the Bollywood blockbuster, Dangal? Bhedh ki hahakar ke badle sher
ki ek dahad hai pyare,— Ignore the continuous bleating of goats, hark the roar of the lion in
the contest.

Never overstay your welcome in a trade. Once you master what is
presented in this book, there’s no reason to be scared of the markets. And
there is absolutely no need of listening to multiple views, and keep getting
confused. Everyone may have a different view as technicals are highly
subjective.



Till You Book Profits, Everything is Notional
We often tend to forget is that you make — or lose — money only on the
second leg of your order, i.e. when you exit. Until then, everything exists
only on paper. In other words, exit is as important as entry. And focusing
only on entries will not take you anywhere. Risk management addresses
this issue:

Focussing on exits in losing trades keeps losses in control and keeps
you alive and kicking for another day.
Exiting from money making trades at the right time will ensure that you
do not give away what you have earned. Moral of the story: Keep
booking profits at regular intervals.

There is a lot of work that markets require of a trader. The rewards are
equally interesting. If you are willing to shed some perspiration, then you
can definitely fulfil your aspirations. Maangti hai laagat mein, tujhse har
boond pasina, par munafa badle mein, yeh jaan le behad deti hai, bande ki
mehnat ko kismet ka saadar parnaam hai pyare . . . Dangal dangal (The
contest demands of you every drop of your sweat. But understand, it gives
back much. Luck favours and blesses a hard worker).

D-Streets is no less than a daily dangal (contest) — you either hunt, or
you get hunted.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 13

OceanofPDF.com



Mastering Your Mind

Winning Techniques Beyond the Technicals

In first part of this book, we learnt how to identify the probable direction of
the market.

We then covered market timing or trading tactics.
Then came the third important part, namely money management.
We now turn to the fourth part which will empower you to implement the

other three parts. That’s mind management.
Intraday trading in general, and the F&O segment in particular, hardly

leave any room for error. If a trader ignores any of these four foundational
aspects of trading, then he may easily screw himself up. It is very easy to
keep losing money despite being right on the market’s direction. Technical
tools like the RSIs and ATRs of the world — even though very important by
themselves — do not suffice to separate the wheat from the chaff, the
winners from the losers. If that were not so, there would be many more
market-made millionaires around.

Every person wants to protect his or her money and wants to grow it as
well. Nobody enters D-street with the intention of charitable donation. In
routine life, most people behave rationally. The same rational people,
however, often behave irrationally in D-street. So, what goes wrong? Why
is the value of money different when it goes inside the pocket, from when it
comes out of it? Why does the loss of the same amount cause more pain
than the happiness generated by the gain? Why don’t people manage their
money well? Why do they repeatedly resort to self-sabotage? Why do they
put in their hard-earned money to buy losers? Why do they dump the
winners to average out losers?



The answer to these questions is the topic of this chapter. And the answer
is a lack of mastery over one’s mind. The simple truth is: You need to
master your mind before you can master the markets or money. Until
you grasp this point and train your mind, you may find it difficult to stay
afloat or consistently implement any other dimension discussed in this
book. This one chapter carries the weight of five. Ignore it at your own
peril.

Markets are no less than the Italian car, Maserati.
Markets too can accelerate from 0 to 100 km/h in less than 5 seconds of

the opening bell. Such breathtaking, blood-thumping and heart-stopping
behaviour — which is quite normal to the market — can unnerve and terrify
the bravest of the brave hearts. With stock markets as your bread earner, at
any given point in time you are just one trade away from becoming a
millionaire, and — hold your breath — exactly equidistant from losing your
shirt. Unfortunately, not everyone is born to look like the Bollywood
superstar Salman Khan when shirtless. Nor can everyone make millions out
of doing so, as does Salman.

The evolution of a D-street trader includes lessons that actually go
beyond trading. Successful trading is a journey that, crucially, requires
mental training. That’s what we intend to cover in this chapter.

What are the psychological blocks that keep people away from success in
D-Street? We will address them all, one by one.

Stop Fantasizing, Accept Facts



Looking for sure-shot trades and safety are a sign of the amateur. Accepting risk is the sign
of a professional trader.

You must accept that trading entails risk. Trading is a very unique
profession. Across the globe, and in all other professions, people work and
earn money. In trading, the goal is to make money work for you and earn
for you. Trading is much more than the technicals that underpin it. Trading
can be aptly compared to adventure sports. Whether it is para gliding, para
sailing, white-water rafting, motor biking, rock climbing, all of them
require extreme mental toughness and intense training. And despite all the
caution, there is always an element of risk. Trading, too, comes with risk,
no matter which technique you choose to use. Standing in D-Street and
looking for safety is like standing in a war-zone and seeking serenity.

This game is for those who are willing to accept risks. The only way to
have zero risk is by staying away from the markets.

Just as there are no free lunches in life, so too there are no risk-free trades
in the markets. The sooner you accept this, the quicker you grow. At every
single price level in a given stock, there are people who believe that it’s a
bargain deal and is worth buying. Equally, there are many others who
believe that the scrip is too costly at current levels and would fall sooner
rather than later. Each set considers itself smarter than the other one. Both
believe they can steal money from the other’s pocket. Only one of the two
will succeed — at the cost of the other. This process goes on and on, and the
loss of one is the gain of the other. That’s the way the markets are made.
Somebody parties while the other pays the bill. You never know which side
you will belong to with 100% guarantee.

So focus on how to win more often and win bigger amounts. Learn how
to cut your losses to smaller amounts, and learn to lose less often. That is
the way to survive and grow in this line. Accept losses. Accept markets and
the risk. And accept your own mistakes. Stop searching for the perfect and
error free setup or technique. Stop fantasizing. Fantasies aren’t real.

Markets are not casinos, and trading is not gambling. It takes hard work
and discipline to merely survive here. The territory is ruthless and hostile. It
takes money, blood, sweat and tears before you can start winning
consistently.



When people say that trading is like gambling, marriage comes to mind.
Only time will tell whether the decision was right or wrong. Don’t we still
get married? In fact, our families are usually more than eager to help us take
that gamble! If you can take risks in life, you can take them in markets too,
provided you take calculated risks and you stick to risk management and
stop losses.

Mental Hygiene
A good trader is not one who claims to be always right with his calls, or
someone who can accurately predict the tops or bottoms at every turn. A
good trader is the one who makes consistent money, period. And that has
very little to do with predicting the market. Failure is good. In fact, failing
is crucial to your growth. Failure teaches what success doesn’t, provided
your attitude is correct. And provided your mind is open enough to squeeze
out lessons from each failure.

A good trader will stay focussed on his work during work hours. Have
you ever seen a doctor discussing how to cut open a patient and from where
to operate on, say, WhatsApp during an on-going surgery?

Trading is a loner’s job; it’s not about consensus. Money is made when
you have a strategy that you have seen working successfully a number of



times. You must also be open to change, to adapt and to learn from those
who know the game better than you. Borrowed know-how alone, however,
cannot make any business successful. The business owner has to know his
business inside out. Similarly, you have to know your scrips better than you
know your better half! The market is booby trapped for self-sabotage and
provides immense opportunity for that.

Hey, trader — crush your ego before the ego crushes you.

Focus on What Matters
Please park your emotions outside before entering D-Street.

Focus instead on what matters, and the rest of life will take care of itself
automatically. The performance of an emotionally ruffled person is never
consistent. Focus on stability and self-control. When anything disturbs you,
just ask yourself whether this contributes to your journey towards your
goal? If yes, address it. If not, ignore it and move ahead. This is one of the
most difficult things to do, and the weak or the ruffled ones stand no
chance.

Ditch that Itch for Constant Action
Desperation only leads to disaster in D-street. You must understand that just
because the markets have opened, you don’t need to jump in or immediately
pull the trigger. If a trap is laid out, you have no obligation to get trapped.
Holding an existing trade throughout the day, or for even longer, is also
trading. Sitting tight when right, and squeezing out more from a “giving”
market is the right thing to do. Waiting for the right entry is also trading.
Equally, staying away when required is also a part of trading strategy.



Focus on Self, and Not on the Opponent

The biopic of India’s former cricket captain M. S. Dhoni brought out a
striking incident. During Dhoni’s days of struggle, when he was growing
up, he once lost a game.

Afterwards, Dhoni’s team was discussing the reasons behind its failure in
the evening meeting. What Dhoni pointed out to everyone was very
perceptive. The evening prior to the match, Dhoni and his team had come
across Yuvraj Singh at the nets and they were all awed by his batting and
personality. They were already viewing him as a force to reckon with. And,
what was Yuvi doing? Well, he wasn’t even looking at Dhoni or his gang.
He was busy practising. Dhoni told his team during the post-loss analysis:
“Match toh hum kal sham hi haar gaye the (We lost the match the previous
evening itself when we were all awe-struck by Yuvraj).” The lesson that
Dhoni learnt was spot on.

The body language of a winner is different, since he thinks about winning
and not about defeating the opponent. The lesson is loud and clear: Focus
not on the opponent. Focus on mastering your own self. Do not ever get
awe-struck by the market, other traders, or their moves. When you reach a
stage where you actually do not worry about anything else but your own
game, you’ve reached an awesome level of freedom.

Seek Within



You are both the problem as well as the solution.

A good trader will never blame the charts or the markets media analysts
or the media for a losing trade. Owning your failures is the first condition
for moving towards success. When you say that someone else is responsible
for your failure, you are making him the hero. You are saying that he was
capable enough to harm you and you were weak in allowing that to happen.
The market doesn’t owe you anything; neither does life. So, work on
yourself.

Unlearn Before You Learn
And there are more things to unlearn than you think.

As kids we are often told to go on trying until we succeed. That’s a
dangerous lesson unless you know where to apply it and where not. If a
trade is not meant for you, it will not work for you. Use your stop loss and
get out of it. Don’t go on trying.



Your energy is better spent on building the good rather than in endlessly
trying to control the bad. Get out of things that are bad for you fast, and get
going on the good ones.

Time is Not the Solution to Every Problem
No matter how much time you give it, a piece of coal will not get
transformed into a diamond by itself. So it is with stocks and trades as well.
It is not just about the holding period, it is equally about what you are
holding onto. It is the quality of the trade that matters. If someone had
shorted Maruti at around  1,400 in the year 2013, he would not have come
into profits even by April 2017. The market is full of hundreds of such
stories.

Another Lesson to Unlearn
As children, we also often hear that day dreaming is bad and a waste of
time. But dreaming about a good and a successful career is the first step
towards building one. When you back the dream up with action, then it is
no more bragging or dreaming. Dream it. Believe it. Build it. Achieve it.

Have dreams, there’s nothing wrong with that — but also have plans to
realise those dreams.

The Seductive Market Can Disrupt Your Tapasyaa
(Focus)
Beware of the seductive power of the market. Sometimes the disruptions
can come in the form of temptations. Beware of the temptations of the lure
of big money. Don’t get led into chasing a trade idea, or the temptation of
taking a super large position that’s unsuitable for your account size, simply



because of someone’s recommendation or your own greed. These could
well be the traps we defined earlier. So, go slow and steady. Stay focussed
and don’t fall for such lures of the market.

What You Seek Will Seek You
Anything that exists in the real world is first conceived by the mind. What
you keep thinking, you keep creating. What you even verbalise, will
materialise. So, beware of what you speak.

It is right there in your mind that the journey begins. Believe before
becoming. This brings us to visualisation.

Visualisation Technique
The universe has got a long queue of pending requests for approval. So you
are in the queue, please wait, — or make sure your intentions are so strong
that you leave the creation with no option but to sit up and take cognisance
of your desires. As we noted earlier in the book, nothing less than obsession
will suffice. Visualisation is the act of imagining what you want from the
universe, believing and feeling how you would be if you actually got it right



now, and keeping faith that you will definitely get it one day. Whatever you
think, whatever you believe in is what materialises.

If you grow up thinking and believing that money-making is a painful
journey and success doesn’t happen unless you struggle and drain yourself
out, that will become your reality. Such belief systems invite hurdles. On
the other hand, if you believe that money and success will flow easily, then
they do materialise comparatively smoothly. If your mind is always
working in a particular direction, that constant focus aligns you to your
goal. So believe in yourself, believe that you will make it even before you
do. Tell this to yourself, and do so repeatedly.



Take Time Off
Once in a while, it’s very helpful to disconnect from all the noise around.
Taking time off can instill much needed stability and calmness and can
reenergise you as you reboot.

Keep a distance from the digital distractions and detoxify yourself, for
the discipline that’s demanded by D-Street!

Calm-a-Sutra is the Key
Remember, every interaction is an exchange of energy. When you interact,
you either gain energy from the other party — provided he is charged
enough and is positive for you. Or, you lose energy — if the other party is
either hostile or parasitic. Avoid unnecessary debates and stay away from
minor battles here and there. Peace is more productive. Every single factor
matters. Especially when the endeavour is ambitious and the road is filled
with twists and turns, full of bulls and bears, highs and lows, greens and
reds.

Stay away from energy suckers as well as time suckers. Isolate yourself, and concentrate.
Limit your interactions, and prevent energy dissipation.

Developing the Killer Instinct
Any kind of business venture requires a penchant for risk. Setting up your
own venture is as much about dash as it is about cash. It will take initial
capital. It will also take working capital. And it will also require a gestation
period.

As I once said on the television is: “My strategy is that; if the snake bites you; you bite the
snake back.”That is what may be called the killer attitude. — Ashwani Gujral



Victory over Mind before Victory over Markets
Visualisation is just one technique that can build strong and positive mental
strength. There are other techniques as well. It could be rigorous physical
training. It could be chanting. It could be yoga. It could be pranayam and
Sudarshan Kriya technique. It could be meditation. You may choose what
suits you the best. Be strong, and stay unruffled. That’s the point here.

Instead of saying, “I hope I don’t lose,” if you say “I am going to play to
win,” it makes a world of a difference. I had once said in a Delhi investor
camp: “When the setup is right, I know that I am going to kill the market.”
That’s the thing. You must play and win one thousand times during practice
before you even enter the trading ring. Mental imagery has a profound
effect on performance. It builds conviction. And that works magically.
Victory over your mind is the key to victory in the market.

Remember that Bollywood song from yesteryears: Humko mann ki shakti
dena . . . mann vijay karein . . . dusron pe jai se pehle . . . khud pe jai karein
— Give us the strength to win over our own mind; before we can vanquish
others, we must vanquish our own distractions and infirmities.

Conclusion



To all those people who might think that this was a chapter without any
trading techniques, consider this: Do you think it is rational logic that drives
the stock market?

Think again . . . .
When dealing with people, it’s important to remember that we are not

dealing with creatures of mere logic. We are dealing with creatures of
emotion, full of fear, greed, pride and prejudice, and motivated by dreams
and desires. Stock markets too are predominantly influenced by emotion.
There are bouts of emotions during calculations of risk as well as during
decision taking. When stakes are particularly high, emotions reign supreme.

There are two aspects to trading stock markets; one is the rational part,
and the other is the “irrational” part. The second part is, in fact, what often
drives the markets. The “why” part cannot make money. The part that looks
at why the company did this, and why did it do that can only help you build
a good research report.

It is not the cause, but the effect, that makes money. It is not the
reason behind the move, but the reaction to the move or the event — it
is the emotion on charts — that makes the money. Yes, we do keep a
track of events because they help us know where to focus.

Trading success is more about the EQ than about the IQ. Stocks can go
up on bad news and can fall on good news. Good traders do not get
frustrated by these things as they understand how the markets operate.

Even the most experienced of traders with reputation for cool and rapid
decision making abilities are said to have palpitations during volatile
events, and at times their emotions — regret, pride, greed, fear, excitement,
panic, anxiety, patience — can and do impact their decisions. Without the
required focus on the psychological side of trading, winning consistently is
difficult. And that is why focus on mind management is vital to your trading
success.

OceanofPDF.com



Chapter 14

OceanofPDF.com



The Discipline of a Day Trader
Anybody who has played professional sport would be familiar with the kind
of qualities that make a sportsman successful. Playing professional sport is
a tough job. It takes a lot of effort, endurance and energy to keep bouncing
back after each setback. Every other person likes to play. But not everyone
becomes a Sachin Tendulkar, a Saina Nehwal, a Mohammad Ali or a Geeta
Phogat. Talent is a very small part of it. It is “practice up to perfection” that
makes champions. Here are some qualities that show how similar stock
trading is to being a professional sport:

Each ball bowled in cricket is an opportunity to hit a six. Equally, it
comes with the risk of getting out. Similarly, every trade comes with the
risk of triggering the stop loss.
Each ball in cricket must be assessed on its own merit depending on the
placement of fielders, pitch conditions, direction, etc. Similarly, every
trade must be assessed based on your pre-defined norms, context, entry,
and exit and risk management.
Unless you truly believe that you are really good at your job, you will
find it difficult to sustain yourself during tremors, or be able to bounce
back from setbacks. Whether in professional sport or in trading, high
self-esteem is a must.
You either kill, or you get killed. There is no third way. Whether in
professional sport or in trading.
You may have to read signs which may not be obvious. You have to
understand the context and measure the validity of the opponent’s
moves. There could be guerrilla tactics against you, whether in sport or
in trading.
If you fail to adequately analyse or prepare, then you should prepare to
be penalised. Period. This applies equally in the boxing ring and in the
trading ring.



One major mistake and you can lose a winning game, be it in sport or in
trading.
Both professional sport and professional trading require agility,
nimbleness, sharpness, quick reflexes.
You must have the ability to keep track of multiple factors, and also be
able to shift gears swiftly with shifting situations. This is important both
in sport and trading.
Practice, patience, and perseverance differentiate winners and losers.
Whether in sport or in trading.
It is important to avoid late nights and partying, both before your match
and before your trading day.
Mounting losses build pressure both in sport and in trading.
There is no overnight success whether in sport or in trading. It has to be
built over time.
Without an inner drive, you will definitely fall short of the required
effort, whether in sport or in trading.
Nothing can be achieved without concentration and commitment,
whether it be cricket or trading.

There have been many movies on achievers in boxing or in cricket or
even in the business world. All of them highlight commitment,
concentration, and a single minded focus. Whether it is about M. S. Dhoni,
Mohammad Ali, or Geeta Phogat. Even the bollywood movie Chak De
India or the movie on Mary Kom for that matter, all of them bring out the
extreme levels of dedication that go into making a world champion in
professional sport.

Many of you might have seen the movie on Mark Zuckerberg, the
founder and CEO of Facebook. We all use Facebook but only a few of us
know how it was built. Mark’s commitment was unbelievable, and
unshakeable was his focus towards his passion. It is never without reason
that a person goes on to become the youngest billionaire in the world.



Short Term F&O Trading is Only for Full-timers
It’s a fact that talent is never sufficient. Neither is hard work. Absolutely
nothing less than pure obsession will suffice. Putting in your hard earned
cash without putting in the other required due diligence every single
morning is asking for losses. Any lack of deep desire will definitely affect
your decisions during desperate times. So either fall in love with the
markets, or don’t be there.

Day trading, and even swing trading in the F&O segment must be given
full time, energy and attention. Equity trading can be done part-time but,
again, that doesn’t mean buying something and then dozing off into
hibernation. Due diligence before action, and analysis and timely review
post the action are both not just important but necessary for everyone. F&O
trading is a specialised function.



Those who think that F&O is a joke will be made a joke of by the markets. I haven’t heard
of a part-time cricketer with top ranking or a part-time neuro surgeon. — Ashwani Gujral

The Daily Preparation of a Trader
If you are a full time trader, you must do your pre-market planning every
single day. There is no question of entering the trading ring without
preparation. A good trader will always have his view about the market and
his scrips before the market opening. He will also be open to the rejection
of his thesis based on subsequent market action. He will accept the market’s
word as final and overriding his own view. He understands that the market
may accept or reject the thesis that he brings along every morning.
Nevertheless, he will always have his thesis ready.

You must have your eye on overnight developments, local as well as
global. You should be at your desk much before market opening.
Disconnecting from the cacophony around at the end of day is important, as
is reconnecting with the latest developments at the start of the next day.

In fact, the early morning routine that you follow will contribute to your
energy levels during the trading session and the resultant outcome or
trading performance. Everything, including how healthy your breakfast is,
or how well you dress up for your work, all of it matters. It impacts your
mood, your energy levels, your confidence levels, your focus, your logical
thinking, your emotional stability and your organised approach. A shabbily
dressed trader who has been watching movies till late at night, or one who
has not even had his breakfast early morning, or has been attending ten
other matters both in the real and the virtual world before market opening
and during market hours, will not be focussed. He will not perform the way
he should in a fast running market.

Remember one thing; you will not attract something just because you
want it. You will attract not what you want, but only what you are. So, to be
a winner, dress up like one. If you think you are a king — then you are one!



Be the Mughal-E-Azam (the Grand Moghul) in whatever you do; be the
master at your craft, and nobody shall be able to beat you.

Yes, there are successful billionaires such as Richard Branson who
operate from a hammock instead of a traditional office desk but day trading,
or even short term trading in F&O segment, is a different profession, a very
special one. It requires you to be highly attentive at all times and to always
be on your toes. I remember one of my trader friends once had an open
F&O position one morning. He got up for a break and sat on a hammock
nearby within his home-office. Suddenly he saw a sea of red colour
reflected on the mirror-finished wall near him. He jumped out of the
hammock . . . but he had already lost money in six digits by then. He had
broken his back while taking a break. We tease him about this incident till
today. The price of carelessness or inattentiveness is far too high in this
game. Welcome to trading!

Pre-market planning includes knowing the current phase of the market. It
also includes your view about what kind of a day you are expecting to see
ahead. It includes being aware of overnight developments across the globe
as any major event can make or break the markets in the morning, such as
the cratering of Wall Street on 2 February 2018 which knocked the stuffing
out of global markets the next week. It includes your prepared daily trade
plan which a day trader must bring to his trading desk every morning. It is
suicidal to get into the trading ring without a plan. The plan must mention
the current phase of the scrips of your interest, and all the important levels
in those scrips that you will focus on during the trading day ahead.

Daily Trade Plan
Let us now look at a sample daily trade plan — see Table 14.1. There isn’t
any hard and fast rule about the format. You can modify it the way you feel
comfortable. What is important is that you trade with a plan, and not
randomly.



Always remember: Plan your trades . . . and trade your plans.

Post Market Analysis
A good trader is equally rigorous about post-market analysis as he is about
the thrill of live market execution. He knows that ignoring this activity can
cost him money. Equally, the psychological and the mental damage that
losses, mistakes and repeated failure cause are even more painful and
destructive to a trader’s future. A good trader will always analyse what went
right and stay humble. He will always analyse what went wrong and stay
grounded.



Use Technical Analysis for What It Is
Technical analysis is not meant to generate error free trades. It is only
meant to provide you higher probability trade setups. Neither the tool
nor the analyst is wrong if it doesn’t lead to a hit ratio of 100%. That is
simply not possible; nor is it needed for you to be a profitable trader. It is
the right combination of research accuracy or success ratio, and risk
management in execution, namely the risk and reward ratio, plus the
position sizing and your ability to ride winners and cut losers with equal
ease that keep you healthy in this business. If you don’t know how to
handle these issues, the problem lies in you and not with technical analysis.
The sooner you accept this, the quicker you will rise. Period.

So, use techincal analysis for what it is rather than blaming it for what it
is not.

Capital is Necessary but That Alone is Not
Sufficient
Being under-capitalised is of no help in trading. For you may have to learn
to lose professionally before you reach a stage where you win like a
professional. On the other hand, no amount of money can ensure trading
success. Capital alone doesn’t guarantee that you will succeed. Markets are
perfectly capable of washing away 7-digit, or an even higher level account,
within a day or even minutes if and when mishandled. The only way to
reduce risk is by knowing what you are doing. And by knowing what to do
when you go wrong. Unmanageable risk comes from trading without
appropriate knowledge.

Developing a “Gut Feel” for the Markets



Traders must develop a sense, or a feel factor, about the markets. This feel
comes from observation, experience and constant effort at skill upgradation.
It comes when you start keeping more and more factors in your view. It
happens when you understand sectoral strengths and the impact of high
weightage stocks on Nifty moves, along with the main trend of the market.
It helps in having conviction about the trade that you would like to take. It
happens when you start understanding the correlation between various
sectors, scrips, news and events, the broad market indicators such as
advance decline ratio, etc. It comes when you learn to keep the larger
context in view, when you learn to understand the rhythm of the markets. It
takes years of market experience before your eyes can start spotting money
making opportunities. Just as it does for doctors, engineers, architects,
singers, dancers, painters, astrologers, sportsmen, entrepreneurs, getting a
feel for the market takes time. But it happens. And this intuition, or gut feel,
is an educated guess and is different from emotional biases that make you
live in hope and wish. When you combine this with technicals, that’s when
your technicals work better and the chances of going wrong get reduced.
You start filtering better.

Complex human activities do not lend themselves to complete
automation. Which is why the pursuit of wealth cannot be totally
automated. Gut feeling plays a role but short cuts can cut you short. There is
no substitute for human judgement. So learn to build that.

Goals Must be Stepped
Every “overnight success” takes years of efforts. So instead of focussing on
becoming an overnight millionaire, focus first on survival. Then try to
consistently make smaller amounts of money. Then aim bigger. Go step by
step.



Hardware, Software, Costs, Commissions and
Record Keeping
Only cheap things come cheap. Premium things come at a premium.

One of the best investments that you will ever make is in your business.
Don’t stinge on the required hardware and software. Learn to differentiate
between an expense and an investment. The costs will stop pinching when
you get results. The market is flooded with software options. Check them
out and get what suits you best. Keep in mind, however, that what matters
more is what you do with the software. So invest in that as well. Only if you
know your job well will the right software get used in the right way. Also, it
definitely helps having multiple screens for those who trade a variety of
stocks and use multiple softwares or scanners, etc.

It is not the machine, but the man behind the machine, plus his
method along with his mind-set, that makes money in the markets.

Another thing — no business is run without documentation. Always
document your work; your planning, your analysis, your results. Not doing
that is a sign of treating your work casually.

Toolkit of a Successful Trader

1. A method of trading that you would like to stick to.
2. Technical know-how about markets and their working.
3. Sufficient back-testing of your trading strategies.
4. Constant skill upgradation and training with changing times.
5. Pre-market planning or home-work.
6. Post market review and analysis.
7. Dedication.
8. Unshakeable commitment.
9. Regular reading habit and staying updated with events around you.

10. Sufficient computer skills and comfort with making best use of IT.
11. Comfort in working with numbers and large amounts of data.
12. Patience in waiting for right trading setup, namely the right opportunity.
13. Decision making ability when the right time comes.
14. Guts to pull the trigger, nimbleness and agility.
15. Grit or mental strength to overcome obstacles and to withstand the pressure in an ongoing

trade.
16. Resilience to rebound quickly after a fall.



17. Laser sharp focus.
18. A sharp and alert mind to spot opportunities in this jungle of more than 5,000 scrips

moving every moment.
19. An understanding of the economy’s macros as well as micros sectors, and their co-relation,

no matter whether you are into technicals or fundamentals.
20. Execution abilities and trade management, namely grip over ongoing multiple trades, from

entry till exit.
21. A positive attitude.
22. The right relaxation that rejuvenates you and gives you a high, without a hangover.
23. High self-esteem; remember, you become what you think yourself to be.
24. Zero mental baggage.
25. A burning desire to win; you can even call it obsession.
26. Good karma — yes, it matters and it makes a world of difference.
27. Ultimate level of discipline — and this includes not just in the work hours, but even in your

life as a whole.
28. Ability to see your own mistakes and accepting them with humility.
29. Spirituality — it strongly impacts intuition.
30. Mindfulness — the ability to be in the present moment.
31. Ability to bend yourself at sudden and sharp turns; flexibility to instantly shift gears.
32. The spirit to take things in your stride and moving on.

Don’t Try to Drink the Entire Ocean
Nobody can drink the entire ocean, or be everywhere at all times. Find your
trading niche and stick to it. If a certain pattern or market mood doesn’t
give you comfort, avoid it. You have a right to say no, and even a right to be
wrong. Be selective. There is no compulsion and there is no reason to deal
with mediocrity. Choose only the best trades and forget the rest. Remember,
we want the money to flow easily.

Experience and expertise do not come bottled, canned or blister packed.
You have to work your way through pressure, perspiration, persistence,
practice and patience before arriving at perfection.

Overcome the Need to be Always Right



Changing tracks is fine. There is no crime in it and there is no stigma
attached to it either. This is the only way to stay flexibile, keep moving in
and out of positions, cut your trades when they go wrong, and make
yourself mentally free for the next opportunity. Once you get out of the
drama and the disaster of an incorrect position, the picture gets much
clearer.

Conquer Your Ignorance
Ignorance is the biggest risk you face in the markets. You need to conquer it
through right knowledge. Cultivate a habit of reading.When Warren Buffett
was asked about the key to success, he pointed out at a stack of books and
said: “Read 500 pages like this every day.” Well, he spent nearly 80% of his
time reading and is convinced that it worked magic for him.

The two best teachers are: books and Mr. Market itself. What is important
is that you should stay teachable.

With the right kind of learning you can greatly improve your trading
results. So keep trying the techniques till you find your niche, and then stick
to it. Remember that something that did not happen till yesterday can
happen tomorrow. There’s nothing impossible if you believe in yourself —
and if you want it strongly enough.

Throughout the book we have given you so many techniques and tools to
handle the twists and turns like a pro. We have covered the 3 Ms for success
in the market:

Method,
Money, and
Mindset.

Now ahead, make use of these techniques. With these you are equipped
to become a Kaabil (capable) trader, a Races (wealthy) trader and a D-
Street winner.



Conclusion
Below we encapsulate some of the important points that you must
remember before you begin to trade each morning:

Don’t look back for anything, except to review the lessons learnt.
Anything other than that serves zero purpose.
Market prices and valuations will rarely in catch up. That’s the way they
are designed to operate. Markets are meant to discount the future.
We are interested in an event only up to the point where it tells us about
the expected flow of funds. That is what reveals the underlying
emotions and emotions drive markets. Otherwise even the best
companies can under-perform for years together. We are not married to
them, and we must never do that.
We don’t take every trade. We stay with quality setups. We stay
selective. You must choose your battles wisely. If a trade fails, don’t
worry, don’t glare, go and find another bull or bear.
We go full throttle when the time is right. We vanish from the trading
ring in seconds, when time is right for that.
Trading affects your psychology, and your psychology affects our
trading. Protect yourself from emotional damages.
The only way to overcome fear is to face it up front.

OceanofPDF.com



Publisher’s Afterword

500% ROI! — The Proof of the Pudding Is in the Eating

It’s natural for readers to wonder if the methods contained in a book
actually deliver results in real life. Well, here is proof.

The table below summarises Ashwani Gujral’s Bank Nifty trading results
for FY 2017-18:

Client name: Ashwani Gujral Investment and Portfolio Management Pvt Ltd
Absolute P&L Statement for ALL-FO from 01/04/2017 to 31/03/2018
FUTURES

Trade details Buy Buy avg Buy value Sell qty Sell avg Sell value Realized
qty Profit ( )

BANKNIFTY17MAYFUT 74000 22763.06 1684466558 74000 22755.79 1683928224 -538334
BANKNIFTY17JUNFUT 196960 23432.98 4615360716 196960 23448.76 4618467358 3106642

BANKNIFTY17JULFUT 207040 23937.54 4956028438 207040 23959.02 4960475506 4447068
BANKNIFTY17AUGFUT 299200 24491.53 7327866698 299200 24505.64 7332086736 4220038

BANKNIFTY17SEPFUT 239000 24627.71 5886021790 239000 24639.17 5888761648 2739858
BANKNIFTY17OCTFUT 25880 24555.95 635507880 25880 24553.63 635447886 -59994

BANKNIFTY17NOVFUT 176560 25557.69 4512465034 176560 25571.36 4514878456 2413422
BANKNIFTY17DECFUT 166240 25300.25 4205913740 166240 25326.20 4210228272 4314532

BANKNIFTY18JANFUT 312480 25928.93 8102271548 312480 25929.71 8102514334 242786
BANKNIFTY18FEBFUT 119040 26102.64 3107258858 119040 26103.56 3107367420 108562

BANKNIFTY18MARFUT 410680 24645.53 10121427870 410680 24655.05 10125336522 3908652
Total 24903232

I must admit the results spun my mind when I saw them. They will spin
yours, too:

1. Gross trading profit of  2.50 crore with a trading capital of  50 lakh.
2. This translates into a mind-bending ROI of 500%, yes, 500%.



So, one thing is clear. The methods Ashwani describes in his books
certainly work for him. There is no reason why they shouldn’t work for
you.

But, do remember, these are results achieved by a master trader after
years of learning the craft and disciplined trading. Obviously, it would be
quite unrealistic for lesser knowledgeable, lesser experienced and lesser
focused traders to achieve similar results straightaway. But it is something
of a shining goal to aim for. As they say, if one man can do it, another man
can, too, and maybe even better — and bigger.

Good luck and profitable trading.
Kapil Malhotra

Publisher, Vision Books

OceanofPDF.com



Bibliography

Douglass, George, Taylor Trading Tactics.
Elder, Dr. Alexander, Trading for a Living.
Gujral, Ashwani, How to Make Money Trading Derivatives.
Gujral, Ashwani and Khemariya, Prasanna, How to Make Money
Trading with Charts.
Murphy, John J., Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets.
Ochoa, Franklin O., Secret of a Pivot Boss.
Pring, Martin J., Technical Analysis Explained.
Raschke, Linda, Turtle Soup Method.
Velvez, Oliver, Team Trading Manual.
Wang, Ray, Price Action Market Traps.
www.day-trading-stocks.org
www.danielstrading.com
www.investopedia.com
www.morningstar.co.uk
www.psychologytoday.com
www.stockcharts.com
http://www.taylortradingtechnique.net
www.technical.traders.com
www.technologyreview.com
www.thebalance.com
www.tradeciety.com
www.tradingsetupsreview.com
https://tradingsim.com

OceanofPDF.com



*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ll-5GPy0xEk&t=2s This is tlie link to the Youtube Video of
Ashwani Gujral at MIT, Manipal.

*As at the time of writing in May 2017.

OceanofPDF.com